Raditz: So, the creatures on this planet are still alive. Kakarot has failed us. Farmer: (holding his shotgun) You're on my property. Raditz: Is that so? (Raditz checks his scouter) Hmm...your power level is puny. Ha. Level five. Farmer: Don't you come any closer! Look, I'll use this thing! (the farmer fires his gun) Ahhh!!! Huh? Raditz: (Raditz catches the bullet) Hmmm... Farmer: Ahhhhh! (Raditz flicks the bullet right at the farmer, sending him hurling backward and killing him) Raditz: Heh. What a fragile breed of people. Piccolo: (Piccolo senses Raditz) Uh? Huh? Huh? What is that? I've never felt so much power! Uh...huh...? It can't be Goku, it's too horrible. Huh! Who is that!? (Raditz lands in front of Piccolo) Raditz: Excuse me for dropping in. I'm trying ta find a man named Kakarot. I thought you were him. Piccolo: Well you thought wrong. Now turn around and get outta here before I get angry. Raditz: Someone's having a bad day... Piccolo: Believe me, you have no idea. Now get lost! Raditz: Teh he he he he he he he he he. Oh, you'd like that, wouldn't you? (Raditz checks his scouter) Power level three hundred and twenty two. I can tell you're not from this planet, but you'd be a fool to attack me...with such an insufficient power. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Piccolo: Now, listen to me. You came here. I have no intention of starting a fight. Raditz: I do. Piccolo: Grr...grrr...grr...alright, if that's the way he wants it! (Piccolo blasts Raditz) Ha ha. Huh? (Raditz is unscathed) Raditz: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Impressive. You actually managed to singe some of my leg hair. Piccolo: Uh!? Raditz: But allow me to demonstrate a more effective attack. Piccolo: Huh...huh!? Raditz: It's one of my favorites. I call it a double sunday. Now, see if you can follow this one. (Raditz' scouter indicates another power level) Uh? Well, I guess it's your lucky day green man. (Raditz leaves) Raditz: (to himself) There it is. Just on the edge of my scouter's range. And it's big. It must be the largest power level on this planet. It's Kakarot. This time I'm sure. Piccolo: (to himself, while breathing hard) I don't believe it. I hit 'im full force and he didn't even flinch. This guy could be a problem. Raditz: (to himself) Have you forgotten your pride Kakarot. We are Saiyans, the mightiest warriors in the universe. I can still remember the day that we first sent you to this planet as an infant. We had high hopes for you then Kakarot, why have you not carried out your mission? Kakarot! Bulma: Hey, who's the kid? Krillin: You tryin' ta earn some extra cash babysitting or something? Goku: He's my son. (Master Roshi, Bulma, and Krillin are shocked) Master Roshi: Your son!? Goku: Pretty wild, huh? Krillin: Well, uh...he sure seems a lot different than you were when you were a kid, Goku. Goku: I know. Chi-Chi can be pretty overprotective when it comes to Gohan. She makes him study all the time and she says martial arts are a waste of energy. Krillin: Oh yeah? Then what does that make us then? Master Roshi: Goku. Raditz: Huh? Goku: Huh? Master Roshi: There's something...something your grandfather once told me that I think you should know. Long ago, your grandpa Gohan was walking through the woods when he came upon a crater that had been recently made in the ground. When he went to examine it more closely, he found what appeared to be some sort of spaceship, and next to it, there you were, lying in a little round pod. Gohan tried to take care of you, but you were wild. Downright uncontrollable and unusually powerful for a baby. You wanted nothing to do with Gohan's kindness. Then, one day, there was a terrible accident. You fell into a deep ravine and badly injured your head. Your grandfather feared that he had lost you, but somehow, miraculously, you survived. Yes, any other child would have died, but you recovered. And from that day on, you became a happy loving boy. Goku: I'm from outer space!? Master Roshi: Yes. Bulma: Well, that would explain a lot! So you think Goku has some connection with this guy? Master Roshi: I wish I knew. Goku: 'kay. You've got my attention. Now tell us who you are. Raditz: Well, I wasn't expecting to give a history lesson when I came here today, but alright, I'll tell you everything. After all, you are going to be working for me from now on and I do like my subordinates to be well informed. (Krillin comes back) Goku: Hey Krillin! You alright? Krillin: Yeah, be careful Goku. This guy's not...normal. Goku: Believe me, I know. I could sense that from the minute he landed. Even now, standing here talking to him like this, something about him turns my stomach. Raditz: Such harsh words. Careful, you're more like me than you realize. Goku: Hmmm... Raditz: You were born on the planet Vegeta. You are a space fighter, a Saiyan warrior, just like me. Goku: Huh!? Bulma: Uh...uh!? Krillin: What? Master Roshi: Goku... Raditz: Ha ha ha ha ha. So baby brother wants to be left alone. Well, its a pity that's not going to happen. No, at this point, I'm afraid you're far too valuable to us for that. You see, three years ago, our home planet Vegeta met with an unfortunate accident, when a huge comet splattered to its surface. The planet was vaporized and the Saiyan race destroyed. There's not too many of us left now brother. In fact, as far as we can tell, there are only four, including you. We were the only Saiyans away from home when the planet exploded. Like you, the rest of us have been sent off to perform a few hostile takeovers. And now we found another world we'd like to conquer. It should bring in a very high price. But unfortunately, the job's a little too big for only three of us to handle. We were almost afraid we'd have to pass it up, until I remembered you Kakarot. You're not as powerful as I might've hoped, but still, with your help, we should manage nicely. Well now, what do you think? Are you excited? You should be. I've come to take you back into the fold. Goku: I heard enough! Raditz: Hmmm... Goku: I'd die before I'd join a gang of pirates like you! Raditz: Interesting. I have been meaning to ask you Kakarot, I couldn't help but notice your son has a tail. Goku: Leave him outta this! Raditz: I'll decide that! If you won't join us, I suppose I'll just have to settle for taking the boy in your place. Bulma: Wha...? Krillin: Goku... Goku: We'll see. Ha! Raditz: I see the fire in your eyes brother. You should come with us. It's in your blood, you love to fight. Goku: Huh? Raditz: Now. Krillin: I'm right here with you Goku. Goku: Just stay close to Gohan. Master Roshi: Watch it Goku. (Raditz teleports and smashes Goku in the stomach, sending him sprawling backward) Goku: Uh! Ooooo...uh.... Raditz: (Raditz grabs Gohan) Like I said, I'm taking your son. If you ever want to see him alive again, I suggest you listen closely. Krillin: Come on Goku! You have to get up! Raditz: Now then, I'll give you one day to think about my offer. Although lets be realistic Kakarot, I'm not giving you a choice. So, when you decide to join us, and you will, there's something I want you to do...prove to me that you mean it. You can start by eliminating one hundred of these pathetic Earthlings. Just stack them on this beach when you're done, I'll be back tomorrow for a head count. Goku: Ah!? Raditz: So what do you say Kakarot? I do hope you'll come through for me on this one. After all, he's my nephew. It would be a shame if I had to hurt him. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Master Roshi: Don't worry! Krillin and I are ready! We'll put that space pirate out of business, won't we? Krillin: Well, if there's three of us, I guess it's possible. Possible but...not likely. Krillin: (to himself) What am I saying? I'm gonna get creamed out there. This stinks! I'm too young to go. I never even had a girlfriend. Krillin: Oh great! What else could go wrong today!? Piccolo: I suppose you could make me angry, but I wouldn't advise it. Raditz: Well, well, well. Look who's decided to drop in. It's little brother. Oh, and he's brought the green man with him. I was wondering who that second insignificant blip on my scouter might be. I confess, I didn't expect it to be you. What a pleasant surprise. I have to hand it to you brother, I didn't think I'd see you till tomorrow. You are a little more resourceful than I thought, and more foolish as well. Goku: We'll see about that! Raditz: Fair enough. So what bring you here Kakarot? Do tell. Have you already eliminated one hundred Earthlings? Goku: I'm here to get my son back! Where is he!? Gohan: That's my daddy! Raditz': I was afraid you said that. Gohan: Ah ha ha ha ha ha! Raditz: You are testing my patience Kakarot! I've been more than generous with you so far! Now for the last time, I strongly recommend that you join us! Goku: I don't care what you recommend! The answer is still no! Gohan: Waaaah! That hurt! Waah! Raditz: You should listen to your big brother. Goku: As far as I'm concerned, I don't have a brother! Raditz: Alright then, you can have it your way Kakarot. I didn't come here to kill you, but it seems you have left me no choice. It's too bad little brother. I do think you would have found the life of a Saiyan to be quite invigorating. Piccolo: Alright! I've heard enough talk! You know why we're here so lets get on with it! (Piccolo throws down his weighted clothing) Goku: Huh? Piccolo!? I had no idea you trained with weighted clothing too. Piccolo: What? Thought you were the only one? Hmm...oh yeah. I feel much lighted. Goku: (after taking off that weighted clothing) That outta do it, Piccolo. Unless you can thing of something else Piccolo: What am I? Your tailor? Raditz: I'll tell you what. Seeing as how your power levels are more or less equal, why don't we make a little game out of this? We'll call it which of you can last against me the longest? The rules are simple. I cause you both a great deal of pain and you writhe around in agony. The loser is the first to beg for mercy. Piccolo: Grr...grr...grrr...grrr...that's it. I don't care how strong he is. I'm not gonna stand here and listen to this. I would prefer to die. Raditz: Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Don't you worry about it green man, we'll get to that in due time. Goku: Hey, don't get ahead o' yourself. You haven't beaten us yet. Raditz: Trust me Kakarot, I know an easy win when I see one. I'm a Saiyan. It's what I do. Piccolo: Come on Goku, lets finish this guy. We'll charge him together. Goku: Wait. Not yet. Not until what he's done with Gohan. Now where is he? Where have you hidden him? Raditz: Right. Your little son? You think you're going to save him? Who's getting a head of himself, now? Goku: This is the last time I'going to ask you! Where IS my son!?! Raditz: Spare me the fatherly dramatics. You can have a last look at him, if you want. He is locked inside my space pod, behind you. Goku: Huh? Gohan: Waaaaaah! Goku: Huh? Gohan: Daddy, help me! Goku: Be strong Gohan. I'll be down to help you in a minute. Just hold on. Raditz: Ha! You'll be down alright, but you won't be helping anybody. Goku: Huh? Raditz: You should say your good byes thought, you won't get another chance. Goku: NO! I won't loose. Goku: Piccolo, are you alright? (sees his arm ripped) Ah! Piccolo: Don't worry about it. It's not as bad as it looks. I'm not out of this fight yet. Raditz: (after he burns off Piccolo's arm with a blast) Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Oh, excuse me! Has anyone seen my arm? Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! You can't miss it! It's green! Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! AH HA HA HA HA HA HA! Piccolo: (about his Special Beam Cannon) Well, the truth is, its untested. I've never tried it against an opponent. I was hoping to save it for a special occasion. It's the attack I planned to use to defeat you. Goku: I see. And now you're using it to help me. You must be terribly disappointed. Piccolo: No. This'll be a good test. And if it works, I'll be using it on you next. Goku: Heh heh. Figures. Piccolo: You know, that wasn't actually intended to be funny. Raditz: Why are they laughing? Planning something clever, no doubt. Raditz: (after the armor pad is pierced) My that was quite an impressive little trick. Look how easy it pierced my armor. It's lucky for me that your aim needs some work. Piccolo: Yes, Goku, with pleasure. I see you had a surprise attack after all, you sly dog. Now, hold him tight, this is the last time I can do this. Raditz: Kakarot, please tell me you're not going through with this. I am your brother. Piccolo: (after Raditz tricks Goku) You've always been way too trusting Goku. Raditz: Just say uncle! Heh heh heh heh heh heh. Uncle! Ha ha ha ha. (to Piccolo) Just look at that fool! Why so blue, green man? Is it because you're powerless to help your friend, or 'cause you're just plain ugly!? Raditz: (checks his scouter) What!? Hey, kid! What happened to all that power you had!? Gohan: W...what power? Raditz: Bah! Play dumb if you want! You'll pay, all the same! Gohan: Daddy! Help! Goku: Leave him alone! Raditz: Ah ha! (Raditz smacks Gohan away) Goku: Gohan!!!!? Gohan....huh!? Please, don't hurt him. He's just a boy. Raditz: Yes, he's just a little boy, that's true. But he's very strong. And he has a power level even higher than yours little brother. And if he ever learned to control it, it would be very bad for us! Heh...so, you could see, I have no choice! He must die! Now! Goku: No, wait. You can't. Raditz: (to himself) You are the first Saiyan to ever damage me like this my nephew. You are a true warrior who was worthy of being a Saiyan. And so, I will give you a death that is also worthy of a Saiyan. Raditz: (to himself) How could that little brat's attack weaken me so much!? (to Goku) Kakarot, you're a fool! How do you expect to dodge that beam and hold me at the same time? Goku: You're right! I can't! We'll both go! Raditz: What!? That's insane! You'll be killed. Is that what you want? Goku: If its the only way for me to beat you! Piccolo: Hold on Goku, I'm almost ready! (to himself) So, you're going to sacrifice yourself? Goku...how very noble of you. And how convenient for me. Then again, even if I do kill you, it's only a matter of time before your friends wish you back with the dragonballs...too bad. Raditz: (while breathing hard and coughing up blood on the ground) Kakarot. How could he? It makes no sense. The fool. Now we're both dead. Piccolo: No, you die alone. Goku won't be gone for long. I'm guessing his friends will see to it he's back within the week. Raditz: What? That's impossible. Tell me...how? Piccolo: Heh, gladly. On this planet, we have something that we call the dragonballs. When all seven balls are gathered together, they have the power to grant any wish, and that includes bringing the dead back to life. So, you see, it's Goku who will have the last laugh. Raditz: Ha ha ha ha ha. No. I'm afraid you're wrong green man. This device on my face, it's...it's also a transmitter. My Saiyan comrades heard every single word. Piccolo: Huh? Raditz: The two of them. Now they'll come. I know they will. (coughs up a lot of blood) They will. I know they will. And once they arrive, you'll be powerless to stop them. There's nothing you could do. They'll seek out these dragonballs and they'll destroy everything in their path. You, and every living thing on this planet will be wiped out. They'll destroy you all. Heh he he. Goku: (also dying) When? When will they come? How long will it take them to get here? Raditz: One year. The funny thing is...aha ha ha ha ha...they're much stronger than me. Piccolo: Stronger? One year? Oh no. Raditz: So enjoy this little victory of your today, it means...it means nothing. You're as good as dead! Piccolo: Grrr.... Raditz: Aha ha ha. I only hope I'm back in time to see it happen. Piccolo: Grrr.... Raditz: Don't look so upset. We can't all have the last laugh. Aha ha ha ha ha ha! Aha ha ha ha haaaa! Piccolo: Grrrrr...... (Piccolo raises his hand to finish off Raditz) Nappa: Grrr...Raditz stinks. Vegeta: He's a complete disgrace. Hmph. How could he let himself be beaten by men with such low fighting power? Nappa: I don't know. Maybe we should go teach those Earthlings a lesson. Vegeta: A waste of time. Then again, I am curious. Nappa: Ah. Are you thinking about what Raditz said? Vegeta: Heh he he he he he he he. Exactly. Those dragonballs caught my interest. Just think of the possibilities Nappa. If we can get our hands on those seven dragonballs, then we can wish for anything we want. Anything at all. Wouldn't you say that's worth making a little trip? Nappa: You kiddin'? Yeah, lets go! Ha ha ha, ha ha ha ha ha ha! Vegeta: Once we force Kakarot's friends to tell us how to find the dragonballs, we'll eliminate them, along with anyone else who tries to stand in our way. Nappa: And then we can wish Raditz back to life. Vegeta: No, that would be a wasted wish. Raditz was a weakling and a fool. Any Saiyan who could be defeated so easily doesn't deserve to live. Nappa: Hmmm.... Vegeta: Actually, Nappa, I have something far more grand in mind. Now tell me, how does the idea of eternal life sound to you? Nappa: What? Living forever? That sounds great! Yeah, and if we can't die, that means no one'll ever be able to defeat us. So what the heck would we need Raditz for? Vegeta: Yes. What for, indeed. We'll be the greatest fighters in the universe. And we will ascend to our rightful place among the Saiyan warriors of legend. Nappa: Do you mean... Vegeta: That's right Nappa. That's exactly what I mean. We will become Super Saiyans. Nappa: Now I definitely like the sound of that. Bulma: (about a scouter) I'll reprogram it too. I think I can get it to display numbers in our own language. Krillin: Wow, Bulma. You're a genius! Bulma: Don't worry, I know. Piccolo: Before you leave, I have a request to make. This'll sound strange but try to put your emotions aside. I want Goku's son to come with me for special training. Master Roshi: What? Krillin: No way! You can't fool me mister! Special training...! Piccolo: Grrr... Krillin: You just wanna gobble him up! Piccolo: I do not! Bulma: Then tell us why. Piccolo: Earlier today, this boy showed signs that he might be the most powerful person on this planet. I think I can teach him to control his power, so he can use it to help us defend the Earth when the other Saiyans arrive. Master Roshi: Hmm... Piccolo: It is a long shot. He might still be too young, we'll see. Krillin: Yeah. He's probably too young. Bulma: Right. I wouldn't chance it if I were you...aha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Master Roshi: Hmm...at any rate, I'd say you'd have to ask the boy's mother. Piccolo: I'm not asking! I'm telling! Master Roshi: Eh!? Bulma: Ah?! Piccolo: Look, nothing else matters right now except beating the other Saiyans in one year! The boy's in good hands. (Piccolo takes Gohan) Aha ha ha. When you wish Goku back, tell him he can look forward to seeing his son one year from now, I'll do what I can with this pampered kid. Hopefully, our work will bare fruit. Remember, tell him one year. (Piccolo leaves with Gohan) Bulma: I never was a good babysitter. Krillin: Now we're done for. So who's gonna tell Chi-Chi? Demon: Yes, I could tell right away from your cool suit. Oh, you Kung Fu guys are so buff. I mean like macho-supremo. You might even have a chance of making it to King Kai's. But, tell me, do you think a guy like me could learn Kung Fu? I mean, I've always wanted to, I just don't know. Goku: Well, sure. It's not Kung Fu though, it's the Kame-Sennin style of martial arts. Demon: Ahhh... Goku: Hey, so what's this King Kai like? Have you met him? Demon: Who me? I'm flattered you think that. No, I haven't met King Kai and I don't know of anyone who has, except for King Yemma. Goku: Wow! And I get to meet him, for real? Demon: Well, maybe... Goku: (about Snake Way) Wow! It seems so long! Demon: (giggling) Oh, we must have a psychic connection or something, because I say the same thing to myself every time I see it. Goku: How long is it? Demon: Well, they say it's over ten thousand miles, but nobody really knows for sure. Goku: Ten thousand miles!!!? Has anyone ever made it to the end!? Demon: Just one person. King Yemma. But he made that tremendous journey many many centuries ago. Goku: Centuries ago...? Wow, if I had known Snake Way was this long, I would've packed a lunch or something. Demon: Oh, I wouldn't worry about food. You've got a very long way to go. And believe you me, a lot more important things to worry about. Gohan: But, I don't wanna be a fighter. I wanna be an orthopedist when I grow up. Piccolo: Hm, is that so? Well you still can, but first you have to help us defeat the Saiyans when they arrive. If we can't stop them, they'll wipe out everyone on Earth, then you won't turn out to be anything. Gohan: But I'm afraid. Piccolo: You'll be far more afraid of me if you don't do exactly what I say! Gohan: No, I don't have anything. What about food, or a bed. What am I supposed to do out here all day? What about my homework? Piccolo: I told you I wasn't going to go easy on you. You're on your own. Gohan: You can't leave me. That's cruel. Piccolo: Hey, guess what? Sometimes kid, life is cruel, and don't you forget it. Gohan: These apples are sour. I miss my mom's cooking. I wanna eat a real dinner. Demon: He said, tell Master Roshi and the others not to wish me back with the dragonballs for one year. Baba: So, Goku wants me to go down to Kame House. Demon: Yup. He said he'll owe you one. Baba: That boy already owes me plenty. But I suppose I'll do it this once. Krillin: (to himself) Okay, now...here I go...uh...okay, now. Chi-Chi, you're not gonna believe this but...uh...Goku is gone and Gohan uh...well we sorta let Piccolo borrow him for a...well, for a while...and uh...he he he he...okay, how about this way...Chi-Chi, um, guess what? Goku's in Other World with Kami and Gohan...well, he's been kidnapped again. Ox-King: I'm so excited to see Gohan. I can't wait. Heh he he he he he. You know, I haven't seen him in almost a year. He's probably all grown up by now. Heh he he he he. Krillin: (to himself) Aw, man! How can I tell him he's gonna have to wait another year? Master Roshi: So, uh, how did she take it Krillin? Krillin: Uh...I didn't tell her. Master Roshi: Ehhh.... Bulma: No way! Seriously? Krillin: Yup. Bulma: I can't believe you Krillin. So what have you been doing all this time? Krillin: W...well, we started eating dinner, and it got late and...uh...they made me spend the night over there. Bulma: You are going to march right back over there and tell them what happened. Krillin: No, anything but that. Master Roshi: Well, I can't blame you. Bulma: Why not? I just did. Bulma: (Bulma checks the scouter for Master Roshi's power level) This should tell us what your power level is. And it's...one hundred and thirty nine!? Master Roshi: One thirty nine, huh? That seems a little low to me. Bulma: No, I'm sure it's a good rating, considering you're an old man. Master Roshi: I don't know which hurts worse...the lousy power rating or the commentary that goes with it. Krillin: Hey, check mine out! I'd love to know what my power level is! Bulma: Alright. You've got it. (Bulma checks the scouter for Krillin's power level) Two o six. Not bad. Krillin: Oh wow! Hear that Master Roshi? My power level's higher than yours! Master Roshi: Eh...that proves it. The gizmo's busted. Krillin: Ohhh...ya think...? Bulma: I know a way to find out. Ah. (Bulma checks the scouter for Turtle's power level) Alright Turtle, put up your dukes. I'm gonna check the calibration on this thing. Power level point zero zero one. Ha ha ha ha ha. Sorry, Roshi. I'd say it's pretty accurate. Krillin: Oh yeah!!! Master Roshi: I'll be... Bulma: Ah, cheer up. You're still stronger than me. Yajirobe: Come on! Open up! I don't have all day you know! Krillin: Now what kind of visitor could possibly be so rude? Yajirobe: It's me. Krillin: Huh...oh yeah...I remember you...you're uh...what's your name? Yajirobe: You know I'm Yajirobe you near-sighted q-ball head. Krillin: So uh...did Korin send you? Yajirobe: Hey, look at me. I'm know-it-all Korin. That's the guy. And he wants you ta bring Yamcha, and Ten-somebody and uh...Chiao-whatever... Krillin: Oh. You mean Tien and Chiaotzu. Master Roshi: Not me? Yajirobe: Yeah, like I said...get all those guys and bring 'em to Korin Tower. I'm training with you too. Krillin: What? No way!? Yajirobe: Yeah, crazy huh? I told Korin I'm not fightin' any stupid aliens and he went through the roof. I thought he was gonna kill me. He's serious. Piccolo: Now, I guess you'll need some new clothes and a sword would help. Now, You can't say I never gave you anything kid. (Piccolo makes clothes appear on Gohan's unconscious body) The clothes are like your dad's, but the symbols show you're from my camp. Alright, I've already done more for you than I intended. I don't have time to babysit you anymore. I have my own training to do. But if you can survive for six months on your own, you'll see me again. And that's when you'll learn the art of fighting the hard way...I'll teach you everything. That's right. You'll learn to be just like me. Heh. Robot: Who are you? What do you want? Gohan: I'm...uh...my name is Gohan sir. Robot: Well, Gohan, keep your voice down. What are you trying to do, bury us under tons of sand? Robot: You're going to have to learn how to take care of yourself. Now stop bothering me. Now, put me back in standby mode and leave. I've already wasted too much power dealing with you and your problems. Gohan: Wake up! Wake up! Please help me! Robot: What? What? What is it this time? Gohan: There's a scorpion! Robot: But this is a cave. Caves have scorpions. Gohan: But I'm scared. Robot: They also have snakes and bats and spiders. Now stop being such a baby and put me back into standby. Gohan: Me again. Do you have anything to eat? Robot: Oh, yes. Being a robot, I always keep plenty of food lying around. What do you think? Gohan: Hungry... Robot: You can always make yourself a nice snake and scorpion sandwich. Now for the last time, put me back in standby mode and just stop bothering me. Robot: (The robot is shutting down) Come now Gohan. That won't do any good. Gohan: Don't go. Robot: Remember what I told you Gohan. You have to learn to take care of yourself. Be strong. Gohan: (while crying) Please! Robot: No more standby mode. It's time to shut down. Time to shut down. (the robot shuts down) Gohan: Uh! Mister robot!? Wake up!!! Come on, wake up! Please don't leave me! Let me help you the same way you helped me! You can't go! Please! Mister robot! Puar: Aren't you nervous about winning the game? Yamcha: What's there to be nervous about? This is too easy. Seems like every time I step up to the play, I hit a home run. Puar: Yeah, but that's a good thing, isn't it? Yamcha: I'm a fighter Puar, I'm not a...ball player. Puar: Don't talk like that! Fighting doesn't pay the rent Yamcha! You have to make money somehow. Bulma: Man, being a jerk just comes so natural to you. Yamcha: Yeah, well, I'd say I owe all my training in that department to you Bulma. Yamcha: Krillin, if you need some help against those Saiyans, let me know. Krillin: Wait a second. That's what I came to talk to you about. I do need you. Korin wants us all to report to him for special training. Yamcha: For real Krillin? Krillin: Uhuh...uhuh. Yamcha: Well, I'm not gonna bow down to those Saiyan jerks! We've got Piccolo on our side and Goku's gonna be back even stronger than before. Bulma: That's true. Yamcha: And besides, it's not every day you get a chance to be trained by Korin himself. Yamcha: In any case, those sorry Saiyans are gonna have their hands full, I'll make sure o' that. Bulma: Wow. Now you're talkin' Yamcha. Krillin: Oh great. She still likes him. Bummer. Arlian Guard: (to Nappa) You'll be glad to know your cell doesn't have any rats. The prisoners ate 'em all. Aha ha ha ha. Nappa: (to Vegeta) Remind me to get that guy okay? Arlian King: I'm suffering from royal boredom. Arlian Guard: Sire, earlier today we captured two aliens. They're in the dungeon now. Arlian King: Aliens? Have the guards bring them to the arena immediately. Maybe they can provide some entertainment fit for a king. Vegeta: Don't put yourselves out. We're already here. Arlian King: What's the meaning of this!? Why don't these prisoners have an armed escort in my chamber? Arlian Guard: I don't know sire, no orders were ever sent to the dungeon. Vegeta: Your guards met with an unfortunate accident. Nappa: (to Arlian King) Come on, your heinous-ness. Bring on the cricket brigade of yours. We're ready. Arlian King: (to his monster) Yedi, destroy these creatures. They're bad. Very very bad. Nappa: We're bad? Vegeta: Well, a little. Nappa: Well that thing back there said we were heroes. Vegeta: Being a hero is highly overrated. Nappa: Grr...too bad. I guess that was a big waste of time then. Grr... Chiaotzu: (Launch has invited Tien and Chiaotzu to eat) Whoah Tien, look! Tien: You made all this yourself? Launch: What are you, crazy? I hired a bunch o' cooks to do all the work. These guys are the best in the business and they only use the freshest ingredients, right?! (The crowd of cooks gets afraid of Launch) Chiaotzu: All this food must've cost a lot. Launch: Don't worry about it. I just happened to come into a lot o' dough lately. Launch: Well, why don't you put your strength to good use and come work with me. You'll get rich. Just think. With your brawn and my brains, we could pull off some major bank heists. It would be so easy, in no time we'd be living like royalty for sure. 'Cause money does buy happiness. You with me? Chiaotzu: Tien, lets eat. I'm starving. Launch: Now that's a good boy! You go ahead and start eatin'. You gotta keep your strength up. Chiaotzu: Thank you. Launch: Look Tien. Robbin' banks is the way to go. It's so exciting when you take control. You fire one shot in the air and everybody scatters like mice. So, come on, what do ya say you and I give it a shot? We could be great. Tien: Chiaotzu, lets go. (Tien leaves) Chiaotzu: How come? Launch: Doesn't he know it's an offer he can't refuse!? Launch: There you are! And you know I been lookin' for ya! You won't get away from me! Tien: Uh...? Chiaotzu: Huh?! Launch: Now I want you two ta quit goofin' around and get over here right now! Chiaotzu: But Tien, we can't leave here...you know... (about Launch) Launch: Quiet little man! Chiaotzu: Aha ha aha ha aha ha.... Launch: Oh, Tien. Tien: Uh...? Launch: Don't even think about tryin' ta forget me! I'm gonna follow you wherever you go and I don't care if you go all the way ta Kami's place. Goku: I'm on my way to King Kai's place. Demon: What? You're runnin' all the way to King Kai's place? Well, for your feet's sake, I hope you brought an extra pair o' shoes with ya. Goku: Why, is it a long way from here? Demon: Now that all depends on what you consider a long way. But from here, I would say that you are about a quarter o' the way there. Goku: What? No way! I'm only a quarter of the way there!? Boy, it is really far away. Mez: Hey, try and be a good sport and save some for me... Goz: Heh heh heh...sure, I'll try...not! Mez: Oh, Goz has done it again. Man, that big lug just can't resist finishing 'em off right away every time. Darn. I never get to have any fun! Goku: Hey Goz, I thought you said there was a way to get through those clouds up there. Goz: There is. You'd be through right now if it wasn't for your problem. Goku: My problem? What do you mean my problem? Goz: Your head's too soft. Goz: Ha! Little does he know that nobody's ever caught Mez except the great King Yemma. Ha. But then again, it has been a pretty odd day. Mez: We got totally burned! Goz: Yeah, for the first time. Mez: That's not bad. Goz: Hey, we're still the baddest ogres in the land. No one can beat us. Mez: What do ya say we keep this little incident between the two of us? Goz: Duh. Maid 1: Apparently, the Princess has really got the hots for this one. Maid 2: Yeah, I hear he's good enough to eat. Princess Snake: Hi there, how's the bath going? Goku: Fine. It's a little hot, but it feels good. Ahh... Princess Snake: Those are hot springs you're sitting in. The temperature stays at a constant three hundred degrees. Goku: Wow. That's strange. It feels like it's been getting hotter in here for the last half hour. Goku: Ahhh.... (Goku steps out of the water naked and walks off) Princess Snake: Oh...oh my... Goku: Now that was refreshing. I can't thank you enough. Princess Snake: That was embarrassing. But oh my...what a bod'. Maid: You can't leave yet. I've got something to show you. And it's my gun. Goku: Uh.... Maid: It gets so boring around here sometimes, I just go crazy. So once in a while, I pull out the old six shooter for a little game of chance. Goku: A game of chance, you say? Uh...something tells me I don't wanna know the rules. Princess Snake: Uhemmm.... Maid: No way. It's a lot of fun. I haven't lost a game yet. (the maid loads the revolver with one bullet) the You just use one bullet, give the chamber a good spin, and now's the time that you place your bets if you want. Five to one, odds say you'll live. Place the gun to your head, then bang, you're off to the races. (the maid puts the gun to her head and shoots herself dead) Goku: Personally, if I was given a choice, I think I'd rather play checkers. Princess Snake: Curse you... (Princess Snake warps into her more demonic appearance) haaaa.... Goku: Uh...huh...stay away from me! All of you! Princess Snake: Too late. You're already in way over your head. Oh my dear, perhaps it's true that I wasn't able to deceive your heart, but your eyes, what about your eyes, have they been deceived all along? You poor blind fool. You can't even see what's in front of you anymore, can you? Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Gohan: An island? I'm on an island? I must be a long, long way from home. Piccolo: My greatest opponent is myself. If I can discover what my weaknesses are, then I will be an even stronger fighter than I already am. Gohan: (to tiger) Don't worry mister tiger, I'll come back. I just need to go home and see my mom first okay? Gohan: (in the middle of a thunder storm while on a boat) Maybe this wasn't such a good idea after all. Boy, I wish I could swim. Gohan: Hey, this looks familiar. I came back to the same place I was before. Oh no. Rom: He won't wake up. Chiko: Is he alive? Rom: I'd better check...I guess not...too bad. Chiko: Oh no. How can you tell Rom? What did you do? Rom: The old ear test. You mean you're six years old and you haven't heard of the ear test before? Chiko: Uh...um...yes I have! Gohan: Hey, that's my sword. (Gohan falls down) Rom: I guess he's dead again. Gohan: Where am I? Chiko: Here. Gohan: Where is here? Chiko: Here is wherever we happen to be at the time. Gohan: Who are those guys? Rom: They're from the home where kids get spanked and yelled at. Piccolo: Gohan, what is your mission? Say it! Gohan: To prepare for the Saiyans. To fight! And to beat them. Piccolo: Then lets go back. Gohan: Right. Krillin: Hey, Kami. I don't mean to be rude, but we're not really learning anything new. Yamcha: He's right. So far, you haven't taught us anything we couldn't do on our own. We wanna be as strong as Goku was when he was here. Krillin: Yeah, come on. We want the same training you gave Goku, Kami. Kami: Please listen carefully then. Chiaotzu: Uh...? Kami: I taught...Goku....nothing! That's what I taught him. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Yamcha: Hey, what did he mean by that? Yajirobe: Who knows? If this camp wasn't free, I'd be out of here! Just between you and me, the food's not that great. Mr. Popo: To be truly strong, you must know yourself and your enemy. Once you know this, all will become clear. Krillin: What do ya mean? Know myself? Yamcha: Don't give us that rubbish! How could we not know ourselves?! I know myself better than anybody! Mr. Popo: Oh, is that a fact? So you know yourself, do you? How come you don't know that you are weak? Yamcha: Whoah! Would you like to prove that!? You beach ball! Yajirobe: (about taking on the pendulum room challenges) Hey guys, have fun. I'm a lot o' different things, but I ain't no guinea pig. (Yajoribe begins to eat a snack) Scarface: (checking his scouter) Their total fighting power is only fifteen hundred and ten. Shorty: And they want to fight some Saiyans huh? The fools. Scarface: Lets go have some fun. Shorty: You should never have come here! No one comes to Vegeta! Scarface: He's right. We try to discourage tourism here. Yamcha: Grr....(charging his energy) Scarface: Hey, my grandmother can gather energy faster than that! But don't feel bad, she's one tough cookie. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Piccolo: Now, eat this ape! (Piccolo blasts Gohan in his ape form and Gohan catches the blast in his hand) Yeah. You're definitely a Saiyan Gohan. Piccolo: Huh!? That's it! The projection! It's coming from that Saiyan spacecraft. Space Pod Computer: (to itself) Wake up Kakarot. Destroy all lifeforms. Wake up Kakarot. Destroy all lifeforms. Piccolo: Goku's ship...what a legacy to leave for his son. Lets see if we can't bring Gohan back down to Earth. Piccolo: You're turning out to be a lot more trouble than I bargained for. There's the root of the problem. Right there. It's this tail o' yours. Look at him, sleeping like a baby. There! (Piccolo rips off Gohan's tail) That should take care of you for a while, 'cause I'm getting too old for this, kid. Sleep well Gohan, you'll need it. Goku: Wow, goodness gracious. Hey there. Are you King Kai? Bubbles: Hoohoohoo hoo. Hoohoohoo hoohoohoohoo. Goku: Whoah. I never woulda pegged this guy for the ultimate martial arts master. Uh...excuse me, King Kai, my name is Goku. I'd like to train under you if you'll accept me. Bubbles: Huh... Goku: Ehe he he...ehe he he he he...listen, I'm kind o' hungry sir. Can I have a piece of that fruit before we start? Bubbles: Hoohoohoo hoohoohoohoo hoohoohoohoohoo. Goku: Wow! That's amazing. This strong gravity doesn't bother you at all, does it? Goku: Sorry King Kai. I was starving. I am ready though. Please teach me. Bubbles: Hoohoo. Goku: Uh? Bubbles: Hoohoohoohoohoo hoohoohoohoohoo hoohoohoohoo Goku: Uh? I guess I'll follow. Bubbles: Hoohoohoohoohoohoohoo hoohoohoohoo Goku: Wow! That'll make you strong in this gravity. Bubbles: Hoohoohoohoo hoo hoo hoohoohoohoohoo Goku: Oo oo oo oo oo oo...hey, this is a lot harder than it looks. Bubbles: Hoo hoo hoohoohoo Goku: Ah ah hoo hoo hee hoo hoooooo hooooo hooooo hoooo hoooooooooo hooooooooo hooo hooooooo hoooooooooooo! King Kai: I thought I'd seen it all. Goku: Huh? Hey, who are you? King Kai: Alright. That's enough. Who are you? Goku: Huh? Hey, are you...? No, you couldn't be. King Kai: I am who I am. Guess who? Go on, guess. It rhymes with pie. Hmmm..hmm..hmm..hmm...got it? I'm King Kai. Goku: Uh!? Then who is he? King Kai: Him? He's my favorite monkey, Bubbles. Goku: Ehe he he he he. I see. I thought he was a little strange. King Kai: Did you just call my friend Bubbles strange? Like you're not. Goku: What's the difference between a jeweler and a jailer? One sells watches, one watches cells! King Kai: Okay kid, you're in. When I'm through with you, you'll be a real prince of comedy. You'll have no equal in the art of delivering a punch line. They'll call you the prince of punch. How does that grab you? Goku: But, King Kai, I came here for training in the martial arts. Piccolo: At least after six months of training, you're not acting like a crybaby anymore. Gohan: Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Hey, Piccolo, is it really true that you fought against my father a long time ago? Piccolo: Yes, but that fight's not finished yet. I have to take care of these two Saiyans first, then your father's next on my list. Gohan: You don't have to fight my daddy. There's no need to now because I can tell that you've changed and you're not such a nasty person anymore. Piccolo: Grrr... Gohan: You're like one of the family man. Yeah, you're kinda like my big green uncle. Piccolo: Uh...uh!? You talk way too much kid. Be quiet and go to sleep. Tomorrow's lesson's gonna be the hardest one you've had yet. Gohan: Good night. Piccolo: (to himself, while Gohan is asleep) Grr...big green uncle!? King Kai: That's the last of the bean tacos. Goku: Oh oh! Beans give me gas! King Kai: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! You just ate a pot full. Goku: What is it? Gregory: I'm not an it, you lunkhead. Goku: Hey, it's a little grasshopper man. Gregory: Yeah, so what? King Kai: Little grasshopper man? Ha ha ha ha ha ha... Gregory: Who do you think you are? I heard what you said about King Kai! So you don't think he's for real, huh? Goku: No, his methods just bug me. King Kai: Ha ha ha ha ha...I get it...my methods bug him...ha ha ha... King Kai: Goku, Gregory will be your next test. Are you ready? Goku: Uh...a bug? Gregory: Hey, buddy! I'm a grasshopper. Goku: But King Kai, I thought you were going to train me personally. Gregory: You'll take on just about anyone these days, won't you? How am I supposed to work with a guy like this who doesn't know the first thing about showing respect for his elders? King Kai: The Saiyan leaders were more than happy to send specimens of their race into the great unknown. They knew that when the babies grew up, they would extinguish any and all inhabitants of the planet they landed on. Goku: I'd like to extinguish them! King Kai: Only four Saiyans survived the destruction of planet Vegeta, and you are one of them. Goku: No! I'm not one of them! I'll never be! King Kai: Easy now. Listen, you might despise your heritage, but at this point, the fact that you are a Saiyan is a great asset. King Kai: Goku, this will be the last day of your training with me. You've done well, but I'm afraid you're lacking in one area. You still can't seem to deliver a good joke when the pressure's on. King Kai: Ahh! Oh no! Goku: W...what? What's wrong? King Kai: I forgot to include in my calculations the time it's going to take you to get back to Earth on Snake Way. Goku: What?! But King Kai, I thought that you were just going to zap me back to Earth. What? You gotta be kidding me right? It took me nearly a year to get here you know. King Kai: Yes, but um...uh...after your training you'll be much faster. You should be able to make it back on Snake Way within two days if you go all out. Goku: No! But that means I'll get there a day late. It'll all be over by then! I can't do that! King Kai: That's enough Goku! I'm not perfect, now am I? Even I make mistakes. Gohan: (after Piccolo blasts him with his eyes) Hey, you cheated. You said no eye lasers. Piccolo: And what if I did? You should never believe anything the enemy tells you! Gohan: Yeah, but I mean, you're not the enemy. Shenron: Why have you summoned me? Tell me your wish now. Oolong: Yes, uh, excuse me. Mr. Dragon, could you possibly destroy the Saiyans that are on their way to Earth right about now? Bulma: Hey, Oolong! That's not the wish! What about Goku, you little pig! Oolong: What? We could wish Goku back but why not wish him back next time and have the dragon save the world now? Shenron: Your wish cannot be granted because the guardian of Earth created me. I cannot grant a wish that exceed's his power. King Kai: That Goku truly does have some incredible powers. Not only that, but his heart is as pure as gold. It's hard to believe that he was living down on Earth. Gregory: He's stronger than you now, isn't he King Kai? King Kai: Uhum...hmm...well, he has surpassed me in every area except one. I am still the funniest man in the universe. Nappa: (after blowing up an entire town) Do you think I was trying too hard to impress them Vegeta? Vegeta: There isn't anyone left to impress Nappa. I should've known better than to let you have any fun. Nappa: But why? Hey, come on, a little destruction won't affect the sale price of this planet. What's the big deal? Vegeta: Try to use your brain. We came here for the dragonballs remember, for the wish? You remember the wish, don't you Nappa? Nappa: Well, yeah. We were gonna wish for immortality, weren't we? Vegeta: Good, and we need all seven balls right? So let me ask you, what if one of the balls happened to be in the city you just destroyed? Nappa: Uh...I'm sorry. I guess I just forgot about that, huh? Vegeta: Well, lets both forget about it. What's done cannot be undone. Inspector: (to Yajirobe) Listen, that's great if you want to save the world, but could you do it somewhere else, this is a restricted area. Yajirobe: (Yajirobe sees the space pods) Aw man, I was right! The Saiyans are here! And I'm supposed to help fight 'em. Maybe I could just go back to bed and pretend I didn't see this. Gohan: Hey, you grew up with my dad, didn't you? He said guys thought you couldn't fight because you were so short. Krillin: Short huh? Actually, we were the same size. But then, he kept growing and I stopped. Vegeta: I guess they're not going to tell us where the dragonballs are, Nappa. Nappa: Wanna bet? Alright, lets see how strong you really are. (checks his scouter) Kid's at a thousand, the Namek is at fourteen hundred, and the midget is at eleven hundred. Vegeta: Gentlemen, how would you like to make a match of this and fight our soldiers one by one? Well, answer. Piccolo: Grrr...we're not here ta play games. And we're not going ta fight on your terms. We'll take you all on at once. Tien: I'll go first. I'm not afraid of these little creeps. It'll be a good warm up. Nappa: Ha ha ha ha. That's the spirit. Fresh meat for the grinder. But just wait. You won't be so cocky when you see what these little creeps can do. Reporter: Why aren't you there with them now? Yajirobe: (while eating) Because. I'm hungry, that's why! Reporter 2: What horrible manners. Yajirobe: Look. It's a strategy. The other guys are wearin' 'em down in the first round and I'm savin' my energy for round two. Reporter: And who are the other members of your team. Yajirobe: You've probably heard of them. You might have even seen 'em in action at the world martial arts tournament. First there's Goku, then there's Yamcha, and Krillin. Reporter: You know Goku? Yajirobe: Know him? I'm his trainer. Yeah. Goku's definitely our best man. That is, if he makes it back in time. Vegeta: (about the Saibamen) Looks like you got a hold of a weak batch Nappa. Nappa: No, they're all good. These are the same ones that survived that crazy battle on Tradic. He should've won. His power level's twelve hundred. All of these Saibamen have the same fighting power as- Vegeta: As who? Nappa: As Raditz. Vegeta: Now do you see my point? Nappa: Well, I think so. Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Do you? Well, don't strain yourself. Just leave the thinking to me from now on. Nappa: (after Vegeta obliterates a Saibamen with a blast) Vegeta! Why? Vegeta: He wasn't of any use to us anymore. Nappa: I know, but...he was alive... Vegeta: Hmph. Nappa: I...I don't understand. Vegeta: It would've been pointless to let him continue Nappa. He was losing, which leads me to believe he wasn't trying his hardest. Hmph. I specifically told him not to hold anything back. Krillin: Whoah! Talk about ruthless. Piccolo: (to himself) No mercy. Even for his allies. He won't be taking prisoners. We're fighting for our lives. Nappa: (to Krillin, who is saddened over the demise of Yamcha) Get over it little man. Don't you get it? You're all gonna die in the end! Vegeta: Calm down Nappa. Ha. Give them a moment to clear this trash off the battlefield. Tien: Are you okay Piccolo? Piccolo: Yeah, I'm fine. Just a broken rib or two. Gohan: (as Nappa slams Chiaotzu into mountains) I can't look! Piccolo: Watch Gohan! I said watch! Don't turn away! Honor his bravery! Chiaotzu: (telepathically speaking to Tien while grabbing onto Nappa's back in midair) Tien, can you hear me? Tien: Ah? Chiaotzu: I hope my ESP is working. I have to say goodbye now. Tien: What? What are you talking about? Chiaotzu! You're not going anywhere! Just stop it! Nappa: Grrr...heh. Chiaotzu: I'm sorry Tien, I have to do this. Thank you for everything. You're my best friend, always. Tien: No, don't! Chiaotzu, please! This isn't the answer! Chiaotzu: It's the only way Tien. Don't worry. I'm not afraid. And if I can save you, then it's worth dying for. (Nappa begins to ascend, trying to spike Chiaotzu into a sharp mountain) Tien: No! Stop it! Get off! Chiaotzu: Goodbye Tien. Remember me! Ah...ah... Krillin: Huh... Piccolo: Grrr... Gohan: Huh... Nappa: Grrr...... (Chiaotzu's light energy begins to envelop Nappa's body) Tien: Chiaotzu! No! Chiaotzu: Hmm...uh...ah...uh...uh... (Chiaotzu explodes himself on Nappa, killing himself in the process) Piccolo: What an extraordinary feat. You see, Gohan. Size alone is not enough. You have to have heart and cunning too. Nappa: (to Tien) Heh he he. You miss 'im already, huh? Well, don't worry, you'll be joining 'im soon. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Piccolo: (about Nappa) He's going to start attacking Tien, and when he does, he'll have an unguarded moment. That's when we strike. Krillin: Eh...eh...eh..eh...uhuh... Piccolo: Alright. Good. Did you get that Gohan? Gohan: Uhuh. Vegeta: That's a good plan. Piccolo: Uh? Vegeta: Nappa's too strong to fight head on. Piccolo: Huh? Vegeta: Don't take your eyes off them. You'll miss your opportunity. Piccolo: Ha, confident, huh? Well, you just wait until Goku makes it back. We'll see if you're still so cocky. Vegeta: Oh? Interesting. Who's Goku? Is he really that strong? Piccolo: Ha ha ha ha ha. You'll find out soon. Nappa: What's wrong, oh wait, don't tell me. I think I know what you need. A nice trip to the afterlife. One way, of course. Heh he he. Vegeta: (to himself) Who is this Goku...? Interesting...huh...is it...? Nappa: Ha ha ha ha ha ha. So much for ol' three eyes. Now then. Where were we? Piccolo: Krillin, it looks like we're gonna have to finish this on the ground. He seems to have a greater advantage in the air. Krillin: Gotcha. Nappa: Ha ha ha ha ha. Fools. It doesn't matter where you go! I'll crush ya! Nappa: This planet's not that big, so why isn't he here yet? He's smart. He's not gonna show up here. He's hiding. Gohan: Hey, you jerk. My dad never ran from anybody. He'll be here and he'll beat you! Just you wait! Vegeta: You've caught my interest. We're going to wait for him. Take a break, Nappa. Cool off for a while. Nappa: Come on Vegeta, that's ridiculous. I was about to finish 'em off here. Vegeta: Just hold off for three hours. We'll give them that. Nappa: Grrrrr......forget it! I say they die now!!! Vegeta: Nappa! Do you really want to defy me!!!? Nappa: Huh!? Uh...I'm sorry. I...I guess I got carried away. Vegeta: We're going to wait for him to show his cowardly face...then we'll make him watch while we kill his son and all of his friends. Piccolo: We can't just give up because things aren't the way we want them to be. Krillin: Uh... Piccolo: We need to be strong. It's up to us now. Krillin: Hm... Gohan: I'm really sorry about earlier you guys. I guess I just froze when I saw him coming at me. If it wasn't for me, Tien would still be alive. Piccolo: It hurts doesn't it? Gohan: Uh... Piccolo: Facing your fears would've been much less painful. Gohan: Ohhh.... Krillin: Hey, go easy on 'im Piccolo. You know, givin' his age an' everything, I think it's a miracle he's out here at all. I mean, if it were me, I probably would've been long gone by now. Gohan: Thanks Krillin. Piccolo: Gohan, you know how to fight. Remember your training. Gohan: But I'm not ready. We still have two hours. Maybe you can train me some more while we're waiting. Piccolo: The training is complete. I taught you everything I know. Just go home. Gohan: But Piccolo...uh...uh...ohhh... Krillin: Wait Piccolo. Piccolo: (to himself) Gohan. It's true. I taught you everything. You're ready. Krillin: Gohan, come back. Wait a second, we need you. He doesn't really want you to go. Come on, tell 'im Piccolo. Gohan! (Nappa throws a blast in front of Gohan) Nappa: Hey, you little brat! Gohan: Uh... Nappa: You better run home. We wouldn't want you getting hurt. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Gohan: You shut up you big bully! Krillin: Uh... Gohan: I'm not running away. You can't scare me anymore. I was just going to go over there to use the bathroom, if that's okay with you. You could use a shower yourself. Nappa: What's that? Speak up, kid. Gohan: Uh...grrr... Nappa: Well? Gohan: Okay! I said you smell! Nappa: Ah! Ah! Grrr...why you little runt! How dare you!? You're brave now but we'll see what happens in two hours. Bulma: Those Saiyans aren't here on vacation you know? They wanna take over our planet and sell it. It'll be the end of the world as we know it. Oolong: Uh...oh, no! Please, I don't want it to end. Uh...oh, I can't take it. Why did you have to go and tell me that Bulma, you know that I'm highly allergic to danger. Bulma: You mean that you're a coward. Oolong: Uh, it's a medical condition. Bulma: Right, your selfishness produces a chemical in your brain that causes extreme fear. Nappa: Hey, how 'bout that? I didn't know these Earthlings had a military. Yeah, now this is more like it. Nappa: (after destroying many fighter jets) Eh, I thought these guys would be tougher than this. They're just a bunch o' pansies in their little toys. Nappa: Ah...secrets, secrets. Heh. What are you fools whispering about over there? Piccolo: That's for us to know, but you'll find out soon enough. Nappa: Heh. Sounds interesting. Well, don't keep me waiting too long. The Suspense might kill me! Ha ha ha! Nappa: (after knocking Piccolo out) Guess I'll have to find someone else to play with until he wakes up. (to Gohan) Hm, how about you, kid? Ha ha ha ha! You know you should be proud! You're Saiyan too! Well, I suppose you're only half Saiyan but still, that's pretty good. The Saiyans are the strongest race in the galaxy. Ha ha ha ha ha. Yup, someday you could've been a mighty warrior. Someday. But not today! Vegeta: (Nappa barely dodges Krillin's destruco disc, having his face slightly cut) What a fool! That shot would've sliced him in two! Krillin: So close... Nappa: Grr...grrr...grrr...grr...grrr...you! You cut me! Oh, you've gone and done it now! You've scarred my beautiful face! And you're gonna pay for it! Gohan: Hey! Piccolo! Leave now! I can take care of this bully by myself until my dad gets here! Piccolo: What? Nappa: Huh? Gohan: If we lose you, then the dragonballs would disappear and we won't be able to wish any of our friends back to life. Piccolo: Teh heh heh. Thanks for your concern Gohan. But I really don't think you can handle these guys alone. Nappa: (to Gohan) Heh ha ha ha ha ha. Just for that, you go first. Piccolo: It's ironic, isn't it? After all my years of training to defeat your father, I go out like this, trying to save you, his son. Gohan: Piccolo! Piccolo: Gohan, you're the only real friend that I've ever had. I wanna thank you. Gohan: Just hold on a little longer! Piccolo: I still remember the first day I brought you here. You were small, helpless. You've changed so much since then. The harder things got. The more determined you became. The more dangers you faced, the stronger you grew as a warrior. I know I was hard on you, but it was for your own good. You're like the son I never had. I'm proud of you. Gohan: No, please! Piccolo: Goodbye, my friend! Gohan: Noooooooooo!!!!! Nappa: (about to stomp on Gohan) Nice knowin' ya kid! There'll always be a soft spot at the bottom of my boot for ya! Ha ha ha! So long! Vegeta: Well, I was beginning to think you weren't going to show up. Especially after your family reunion with Raditz. Did you two have fun catching up? Goku: Haaaaaaaa! Haaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa! (Goku keeps charging) Vegeta: Power level's eight thousand! How? Wait, it's over nine! Nappa: Vegeta, what did you say his power level is? Vegeta: It's over nine thousand! Ha! (Vegeta takes off his scouter and crushes it in his hand) Nappa: Nine thousand!? There's no way that can be right! It can't! Goku: Don't be so sure. I'll have you know I was trained in the art of Kaioken! Vegeta: Huh? Kaioken? Nappa: Kaio-whatever!!! Who cares!? I'm still gonna crush you! I don't care what you've learned! Nappa: I'm the second strongest Saiyan in the universe! Goku: Ha. Well, if your friend is stronger than you, then I'd say that makes you the third strongest. Nappa: Ha, ha ha! Kakarot! I'm gonna rip you apart! (Goku dodges all of Nappa's attacks) Vegeta: It's strange. Just a year ago, he couldn't beat Raditz and now he's making sport of Nappa. Nappa: I hate yooooooou! (angrily throws a rock at Goku) Goku: (Goku dodges the rock with ease) You hate losing. You're not used to fighting someone stronger than you! Nappa: You're not stronger than me, you little runt! Your strength was tested when you were a baby! You're a third class Saiyan! I'm a Saiyan elite, you low class dog! Vegeta: Nappa, don't be a fool! Calm down! How do you expect to win when you're so mad you can't even see straight!? Now settle down! Use your head! Vegeta: Alright, that's it! Enough! You heard me Nappa! Come down here! You're finished! Nappa: Grr... Vegeta: Don't look at me like that! So far, you haven't managed to land a single punch! I think you've embarrassed us long enough! Nappa: I...I...I can't move my legs. Krillin: Wow Goku, I think you really hurt that guy. He's not getting up. Goku: (to Vegeta) He won't be fighting anymore. I suggest you take him back to wherever you came from and get him some help. Vegeta: (to himself) He's so confident. How could he achieve that drastic increase in power and speed? Krillin: Hey Goku, how did you do that? That was one of the most amazing attacks I've ever seen. What was it? Goku: Oh...it's the Kaioken attack. It's like a massive upsurge of energy. Everything is heightened, power, speed, even hearing and vision improve dramatically. You sort of become a super-self. But it can only be sustained for a short time, so you have to get the job done quickly. Krillin: That's so great! Do you think you'll be able to teach me how to do a move like that someday, maybe, huh? Goku: Maybe. Vegeta: As usual, I have to do everything myself. Krillin: Why didn't you use that Kaioken to attack him in the first place Goku? Heh, with a move like that, you could've taken him out anytime you wanted to. Goku: That's true. I could have, but the problem is there's always a chance that the increase in energy could've destroyed my body. But I'm still here, aren't I? Yeah. Nappa: Vegeta, give me your hand. I can't get up...uh...uh... (Vegeta grabs Nappa's hand) uh...oh...thank you...ehe...heh... Vegeta: Sure. It's the least I can do, Nappa. Haaaa! (Vegeta hurls Nappa into the air) Nappa: Ah!! Ahhhh! Ahhhh! Vegeta: Maybe you won't be such a disappointment...when you're dead! Nappa: Ahhh! Vegeta: Haaaaaa! Goku: Wow! This is intense! Gohan: Dad, what's happening?! Krillin: Whoah! That guy's powering up! Hang on! Vegeta: Goodbye. Grrr.....grrr...grr.....grr......haaaaaaaaaaa! Nappa: (Vegeta emits a blast from his body that hits Nappa in midair) Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhh!!!! No! No! Vegeta!!!!!! Vegeta: Hoo ha ha ha ha ha ha! Nappa: Ahhhhhhh....ohhh....! (Nappa dies in midair from Vegeta's attack) Vegeta: You can waste all the time you want with your pathetic goodbyes, but you're simply postponing the inevitable. Goku: (about Vegeta) It's too bad! It seems he's totally determined to end things this way! He sure would make a good sparring partner! (Krillin raises his hand to shake Goku's) Hm? Krillin: Hey Goku, you're my friend. We grew up together. Just make sure that...that we both grow old together too. (Goku holds Krillin's hand) Goku: Right. I couldn't have asked for a better best friend than you Krillin! Vegeta: Kakarot, I have a proposition for you. I'm only going to say this once, so listen carefully. I, Vegeta, Prince of all Saiyans, would like to offer you, Kakarot, the opportunity to stand beside me in this conquest. With Nappa gone, I could use a good man. Think about it. We would rule the planets. You could have anything you desired. There's no one in the universe that could touch us. Nothing would be out of your grasp. Well, what do you say Kakarot? Goku: I have everything I could ever want right here on Earth, so I'll have to say, no thanks. Besides, I've seen how you treat your partners, not much job security. Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Alright then, so be it. You had your chance. Vegeta: What's the matter Kakarot? You don't seem too eager to continue. Don't tell me you already need to catch your breath. We were just getting started. Yajirobe: (to himself) Goku's insane. This guy is beating him senseless but he just keeps coming back for more. I know Goku's tough, but it seems like this time, he's finally met his match. Vegeta: Now I see why you have no desire to join me on the hunt. If we still had a home planet, you'd be a laughing stock there. Yajirobe: (to himself) Oh man. It looks like Goku's in big trouble. I've gotta help him somehow. And I guess the best way for me to do that would be to...uh...hide...somewhere this way. Master Roshi: The power measured from Goku was unstable. Think about it. A candle flickers most violently just before it burns out. Chi-Chi: You're saying that Goku's in trouble? Master Roshi: (sarcastic) No, I'm talkin' about candles...of course he's in trouble! Vegeta: (to himself) Grr...grrr...this shouldn't be happening! I don't understand! I'm a super elite! Now he's sealed his fate! This planet is history! I'll destroy everything! Everything! Do you hear me Kakarot?! You're finished! Vegeta: (to himself) Who does this fool think he's dealing with!? He's beneath me! I'll show him. I'll show them all! I'll reduce this place to ashes! Yajirobe: (When Goku and Vegeta's blasts clash) Oh no! If I knew this was going to happen, I would've eaten more pizza and ice cream! Yajirobe: Good thing it's over. Isn't it? Goku: Well, at this particular moment, things are looking pretty good. I don't think he's enjoying himself. Yajirobe: Wow, how cool! Standing together. The Earth's greatest defenders. Goku: Not quite. That didn't stop him. Just slowed him down a little. I think he'll be coming back soon. Yajirobe: Uh...you sure? Goku: Uhuh. Yajirobe: See you Goku. Looks like you got it all under control! (Yajirobe runs away) Vegeta: Goodbye Kakarot! Argh! (Vegeta smashes his huge arms into the boulders as Goku tries to evade him) Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Go ahead and run, because you can't hide! Goku: I think I'm finally beginning to understand. The giant monster my grandpa warned me about...it was me. Yes, I get it now. I'm the one who destroyed the stadium at the world tournament and I'm the one who...who crushed my grandpa. Why didn't anyone tell me? All these years, Master Roshi and the others, they must have known the truth. Must have seen me transform into this...thing. I'm sorry grandpa, I don't know if there's any way I can make it up to you...I'm gonna try. Vegeta: Ha ha ha. Ha ha. Well, I guess that does it for the great hero of this puny little planet. Pity, heh heh. I was just beginning to enjoy the challenge. Heh heh heh heh heh. Vegeta: Awww...you look so scared...ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Let me put you out of your misery once and for all! Vegeta: (after stepping on Goku's body) Woops! Sorry about that! Apparently I've accidentally squashed both of your legs. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! I guess you can't run from me anymore now. Vegeta: (after he attacks Goku's immobilized body) Being a good fiend is like being a photographer. You have to wait for the right moment. Gohan: You put my dad down right now! Vegeta: Ha ha. Oh no...it's you. Please don't hurt me. I'll do anything you say. I'll put your father down if you want, it might be one piece at a time, but I'll definitely put him down. Ha ha ha ha. Now, which piece would you like first? Gohan: You better not hurt him! Vegeta: It's a little too late for that...ha ha ha ha! Vegeta: (to Krillin) Did you really think you could sneak up on me little man? Did you really think that you could fool me with such a simple ruse? Like I'd believe for a second that Kakarot's son came back to finish me all alone. Ha! I knew from the instant I saw him that he was merely trying to distract me from the real threat. You'll have to do better next time, except there won't be a next time. You're finished. As soon as I'm done squeezing the life from Kakarot, you're next. Yajirobe: (to himself, after cutting off Vegeta's tail) I must be out of my mind. I couldn't've picked a worse time to decide to be brave. Vegeta: (to Gohan) You're a low class scum just like your father! Vegeta: I hope you're watching this Kakarot! Get a good look, because it's the last time you're going ta see your son! Krillin: (about Vegeta) He looks finished alright. I guess that blast really did 'im in. Good thing 'cause he was bad to the core. At least now, we won't have to look at his ugly face anymore. Vegeta: (opens his eye) Who's face is ugly!? Vegeta: (to Krillin) I suppose you think you're very clever, don't you? Well, here's a piece of advice, if you're going to shoot someone in the back, make sure and finish them off. It's going to be my greatest pleasure wiping you and your worthless friends off the face of this planet. Vegeta: (to Krillin) How does it feel knowing you had one chance to save your precious Earth and everyone on it only to fail miserably? Vegeta: I'm done toying with you! I'm going to do now what I should've done from the very beginning. I'm going to blast all of you insolent pests into oblivion. Vegeta: (about Gohan) I can't allow this brat to transform. Not today! Yajirobe: Leave him alone! Vegeta: What!? Yajirobe: Yahhhh!!! (Yajirobe runs at Vegeta and swipes his sword at Vegeta's back) Vegeta: Ahhh!!! You cut through my armor! Yajirobe: (after swiping Vegeta with his sword) Ha ha ha ha ha ha! I got him. I got him. I got him. I got him. Ha ha. I beat you, dirtbag. I can see it now...Earth's greatest threat brought down by Yajirobe. Ha ha ha ha ha. Oh, yeah! Took him down. You should learn not to mess with the best. You can't handle it! Vegeta: (Vegeta stands back up) What was that, tubby? Yajirobe: Uh...wait a minute...hey, hold on! I was...I was just kidding about the whole dirtbag thing. You really thought I was trying to hurt you, didn't you? Ha ha, that's funny. I was just messing around with you. (Vegeta kicks Yajirobe in the face, sending him sprawling in the air) No, wait. Listen. I don't think you understand. (Vegeta punches Yajirobe hard, sending him through a boulder) That hurt... Yajirobe: (about Vegeta, who is being attacked by Gohan who transformed into a giant ape) I'm glad I'm not him. Krillin: Eyaaaaaa!!!!! (Krillin almost pierces Vegeta with the sword) Goku: Stop! Don't do it. Krillin: Goku, is that you? We have got to stop this guy while we have the chance. He's...he's pure evil. Goku: No, listen. Just let him go Krillin. Show him what it means to be merciful. Krillin: Merciful!? But Goku, he's- Goku: I know what you must be thinking, but believe me, I know what I'm doing. Krillin: This is the guy that threatened all the people here on Earth. Surely, he'll try to come back and destroy us again. I just don't think it's a good idea to let him escape now that we have a chance to stop him for good. Goku: By doing this, we're showing him that there is another way, a better way. Krillin: Goku, I don't think this is the kind o' guy that can learn a lesson like that. He'll just think we're weak. It won't change him at all. Goku: Don't be so sure about that Krillin. It wouldn't be the first time something like that happened. Think about it. When Piccolo first came to us, he was just as evil as his father had been. He nearly destroyed not only me, but the entire planet. And now... Krillin: And now he's one of us. Goku: Right. And if someone as evil as Piccolo can change, I think anyone can. Vegeta deserves to have that same chance. And by showing him that the people of this planet have compassion and can show mercy, maybe he can learn to show some of his own. Piccolo learned. And now he's not only a powerful ally, he's also a good friend. He even took care of Gohan while I was gone and traded his own life to protect him. Who know, Vegeta might do the same thing for one of us someday. Krillin: Grrr.... Goku: Krillin, please. I know this is the right thing to do. You've got to trust me. Krillin: But the Saiyans killed Yamcha...and Tien. Chiaotzu! I can't let him get away. Goku: Don't do it Krillin. I know it seems like justice, but it's not right. If you strike him down, it will only show that we aren't any better than he is. It means that they've won, no matter what. He's strong....don't forget Krillin, I am a Saiyan, just like he is. (Krillin drops the sword) Thanks Krillin, that took a lot of strength and courage. I'm proud of you. Krillin: Goku, I sure hope you're right about all of this. I'd hate to think of what might happen if he comes back to try this again. But if he does, we'll be ready for 'im and we'll stop 'im again. Goku: You bet. King Kai: (to himself, from afar) I hope Goku knows what he's doing. I sure wouldn't want for Earth to have to face that evil again. Krillin: Uh? Vegeta: (to Krillin) When I come back to this planet, you're all going to suffer. And when you beg me for mercy, I'll stare into your eyes as I crush the life out of you! (Vegeta leaves in his pod) Yajirobe: You should be thanking me! I'm the one who cut off that Saiyan creep's tail you know! Jeez, you stick your neck out for people, and this is what you get! Yajirobe: Hey, Chi-Chi, what the heck's goin' on here? Chi-Chi: Huh? Yajirobe: Goku just came back from the dead and saved the world and you've hardly even looked at him. He's your husband, aren't you at least gonna say hello? Chi-Chi: What? Say hello? Oh, no. I don't have a single thing to say to that man right now! It's his fault my baby almost got killed! Gohan: Mom, but the Saiyans were gonna destroy the Earth. Chi-Chi: They can blow up the universe for all I care. That's no excuse for putting my little boy's life at risk. Gohan: Uh... Yajirobe: Hmm...man, Goku. Your wife is crazy. Krillin: I think Namek is where they're from. I mean, Piccolo and Kami, they're aliens. Yajirobe: Well, I always said, they were funny lookin'. Master Roshi: You see, the dragonballs are tied to the one who created them. And, they cannot grant a wish that exceeds their maker's power. Yajirobe: Oh, that's a load o' hooey. You're makin' it up. You just don't wanna admit that you're wrong. Yeah. (Korin slaps Yajirobe's face with his tail) Korin: Hey, I thought I told ya ta can it, stupid! Yajirobe: People can be pretty disgusting sometimes. Korin: You said it. Chi-Chi: You just leave my little Gohan out of this. His fighting days are over! Krillin: Hey, Goku. You shoulda seen Yajirobe fight. Yajirobe: Grr...well, I didn't see you guys doing any better. Korin: It's hard to see when you're hiding. Krillin: Yeah, he really showed Vegeta. He was so brave. I wasn't trying' ta hurt ya, I was just playin' around. Heh, nice one. Yajirobe: It was strategy! I was distracting him!!! Master Roshi: (after Bulma walks in) Oh, it's Bulma! I thought it was a hot new nurse. Heh. Bulma: Can't you be serious for a change? Master Roshi: I was serious. Bulma: Somebody help me! I'm too young and pretty to die! Master Roshi: (Krillin is afraid after hearing Goku's screams in the hospital room) Why are you shaking like that Krillin? Krillin: Uh...because I'm cold. Dr. Brief: I kind of feel a little embarrassed asking, but do you know anything about integrated microcircuit feedback loops and their effect on afterburner ignition rates? Bulma: I didn't understand anything you just said, so I guess just plug stuff in where it looks like it fits and hope it works. Dr. Brief: Righto. Master Roshi: Ahem...two months alone with Bulma...sign me up! It'll be the trip of a lifetime, I promise. Gohan: Don't be silly mom. Chi-Chi: I'm silly? My son tells me I'm silly? I'm not the one who wants to run around and be a superhero. Gohan: Bulma, you'll take me with you, won't you? Chi-Chi: That's it. I'm putting my foot down Gohan! I won't let you leave me again. You just came home, after you've been gone for a whole year Gohan. You're a child. Act like one! Don't throw away your childhood trying so hard to be a brave adult. Being a kid's the best part of life. You should be making friends and playing baseball, not trying to save the world! Gohan: I'm going!!! Chi-Chi: H...How did I raise such a stubborn child!? Gohan: There's no time for those childish things anymore. My friends are gone and they're not coming back. I've got to help find the dragonballs. Mom, Piccolo died trying to help me so I think I should do everything I can to help him. I can't sit around and do nothing while Piccolo needs me. I'm sorry I yelled at you Mom, but I have to try. You see...they're my friends. Yajirobe: Heh heh heh heh. Pretty good speech kid. You sure didn't learn that from your father. Krillin: Hee hee ha ha ha. I worried about not having a spacesuit. At least I don't have to wear a little uniform. Gohan: Yeah, dad thought I looked pretty funny too. Chi-Chi: I don't know why. I think it makes him look like the cutest thing. Krillin: So what's with all this stuff? Chi-Chi: Here's his underwear, toothbrush, coloring book, and sleep mask. And here are some snacks for the trip and his medicine. And we have a hair dryer, full dinner set with salad and dinner forks. Multi- Krillin: Yeah, I think we get the picture. Bulma: I don't wanna interrupt your training but this place is filthy. Can't you two find a minute to clean this mess? Krillin: Hmmm... Bulma: I like to run a tidy ship. Krillin: Sorry Bulma, but we don't eat junk food and read magazines. That's all your mess. We already cleaned up after ourselves. Bulma: Yeah, but I'm busy. I have too many other important issues to deal with right now. Besides, you two never do anything to help out around here. Krillin: Uh...but Bulma, you said you were bored. Bulma: Uh, you're hopeless. And don't cry to me if I forget about making your dinner. Krillin: Uhh... Bulma: (yawns) I have so much to do today. Krillin: The only thing she's busy doing is complaining. Bulma: That was weird. One second we're about crash into our own ship and the next, we're...well who knows where...it looks like we're on another ship. Krillin: Yeah, a big one. Probably full of big scary aliens too. Bulma: Well, I hope you're wrong. (Gohan pops up) Gohan: Oooaa! Hey! Look at me! I'm an alien! Krillin: Gohan, that's not funny. Bulma: Oh, great! Krillin: Huh? Bulma: I forgot to put some pants on before we left! Krillin: That's too bad. It's freezing in here. Bulma: You think I don't know that? I'll deal with it. Krillin: As long as you don't blame us if you catch a cold or something. Bulma: Listen. You two need to be more aware of what's going on around here! I almost got my head shot off! Gohan: What if this is a...a Saiyan spaceship!? Bulma: What do you mean? Krillin: Yeah, this could be the place that Vegeta went to recover. Bulma: Enough talk about that guy! Lets change the subject! I'm getting goosebumps. Gohan: But wait, if this is Vegeta's ship, maybe he's in there somewhere waiting for us. Krillin: I wish Goku had let me finish him when I had the chance. Master Roshi: (after Goku sees a needle and screams) Oh boy. Goku, please don't tell me that I'm going to have to start training you not to fear needles. Bulma: Nice. I save your lives, and what do I get in return? Guns in my face. Boon: We're talking about your homicidal friend named Frieza. Krillin: I wonder if the people who attacked with Frieza were Saiyans. Hey, do you remember if the people that conquered your planet had tails that came out about this far? Zeshin: A tail? I didn't see a tail on any of them. Krillin: Oh, well, so much for that brilliant theory Krillin. Bulma: That means, there's a group of warriors out there even more evil than Saiyans. Zeshin: (about Frieza and his henchmen attacking) They murdered everyone who came across their path. Women, children, there was no limit to the carnage. It was terrible. Gohan: Are you always this nice to complete strangers? Raiti: Only with the ones we like. Zaacro: You're looking at the worst doctor on this planet. Raiti: Very funny. Pay no attention to Zaacro. He's been a thorn in my side for three hundred years. Krillin: You can rest if you want. You've helped us out enough already. Raiti: No worries. I really have nothing better to do now anyway. Chi-Chi: Why can't you just lay there and sleep like a normal patient? You're bothering everyone! Goku: Because I'm not a normal patient. I'm a fighter. I need to get outta this place! Chi-Chi: Oh Goku! Stop talking like such a tough guy! Krillin: Hey, guys. We got a problem here. Since the monster is obviously dead in the swamp, then that means the dragonball must be somewhere on the bottom. Gohan: And if that swamp melts us instantly, then how are we gonna get it back? Raiti: It's impossible! Gohan: Huh? Bulma: Are you sure? Raiti: We do have a protective body suit we use for underwater operations, but the material it's made of is not strong enough to handle the swamp. After about twenty seconds, it begins to rapidly melt! Gohan: I'm gonna do it! Krillin: What? Bulma: (same time as Krillin) What? Gohan: We have to retrieve the dragonball at all costs, isn't that right? Bulma: Well, yeah. I guess so but I- Gohan: So all I have to do is surface within twenty seconds to be safe. Come on, it's at least worth a try. Raiti: Oh, I know. We'll tie a special rope to him and pull him out before twenty seconds is up. Then we can be sure you get out safely. Krillin: That's a good idea. Bulma: Okay, then lets get to it. Krillin: This planet is so huge. I kinda get the feeling this is gonna take a while. Zaacro: Don't worry, we'll find them in no time. Gohan: There's nothing I like more than a positive attitude. Bulma: (about a dragonball in the middle of a tornado) What are you doing? Don't stare at it! Go get it! Krillin: Man, she's bossy. Are you ready to go head to head with a tornado? Gohan: Yup. Krillin: Lets do it. Bulma: (the tornado comes closer to her and she starts running away) This is exactly the kind of thing that makes me wanna never come back to this horrible planet! Chi-Chi: (angrily, about Goku) Goku even forgot to pack his sweater! I go through the trouble of making this and he forgets it. Why, I could strangle him with it! Giant: (the giant approaches them angrily as Bulma struggles to make a plane work) I think I found what I'm having for lunch! Krillin: (afraid) Bulma, I don't mean to rush you, but, I don't wanna be lunch! Bulma: (the ice cave begins to collapse) I thought you guys said you were extra careful so this wouldn't happen!? Krillin: We were, but you distracted us with skin care talk! Malaka: Care to tell me what happened Vegeta? Or is the wound to your ego still too raw to be examined? Judging by these stress fractures in your protective armor, you must've received quite a beating, and that's putting it lightly. I hope you're not entertaining ideas of revenge, I might not be here to put you back together next time. Bulma: Okay then, lets go get this thing over with. I'm in desperate need of some beauty sleep. Bulma: I just hope my frostbitten face doesn't scare away Yamcha when I see him. So will it? And I want an honest answer, no patronizing, please. Krillin: You look radiant Bulma. Cui: Well, Vegeta. I hear you took quite a beating recently. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. You couldn't even take over one measly planet. And if all the rumors are true, which I'm sure they are, you couldn't beat a third class Saiyan. Vegeta: Drop it Cui. I don't have time to waste gossiping with half-wits like you. Cui: Just a minute. (Cui puts his hand on Vegeta's shoulder) The word is that Frieza isn't too happy with you and your attitude Vegeta. Vegeta: Ha ha ha. Just let Frieza try to do something about it. Cui: Eh...uh...eh... Vegeta: Now get your hand off me. Cui: Your mouth is big, but I think you're biting off more than you could chew. You don't know what you're up against Vegeta. Nobody has survived a fight with Frieza. Vegeta: Hm. Cui: You just don't seem to get it, do you? Let me put it plainly...Frieza is utterly indestructible. Vegeta: Enough. Now tell me where Frieza has run off to hide. Cui: Hm. The planet Namek. Vegeta: (to himself) What? But how could he know? If I don't beat him to the dragonballs, then I'll never be able to defeat him. Cui: Why don't you do the smart thing and just give up because you will never get those dragonballs. Believe me, Vegeta. Frieza will most certainly find them first, and when he does, we'll destroy the planet Namek. Vegeta: Huh! I can't give up. Ha. (Vegeta runs off) Cui: Wait, Vegeta! Malaka: Vegeta? Vegeta: Wha...wait, on second thought I think I'll be needing this doctor! (Vegeta snatches his scouter back and runs off to his pod) Cui: Vegeta!!! Vegeta: (in his pod) Alright, Frieza! I'm coming for you! Vegeta: (about Frieza) I have no way to beat him in a proper fight. I have to find the dragonballs and win eternal life, then I'll teach Frieza a thing or two about who he's messing with. I just have to get those dragonballs first! (checks his scouter) Now, let's take a little peek around...see what's cooking on this sorry excuse for a planet...eh, what's this? Well, I see he brought Zarbon and Dodoria along for the ride. Chi-Chi: I was thinking Goku... Goku: What is it Chi-Chi? Chi-Chi: Our little boy's been gone for almost a month now... Goku: Yeah, and? Chi-Chi: And I think I forgot to pack his toenail clippers. Bulma: What if you'd walked outside and there would've been no oxygen!? Krillin: Well, freak out, why don't ya? Bulma: What....what kind of ship is that? Krillin: It looks like a Saiyan ship! Bulma: Now I'm scared! Krillin: That's just great... Bulma: This can't be happening. It's just a dream. It's just a dream. Krillin: Gohan, mask your energy, or he'll sense you. Gohan: Right. Krillin: It's Vegeta. It's gotta be. (throws his hat down on the ground) Bulma: Did you just say Vegeta!? Ahh....!!! Krillin: Yeah, and he must be here for the dragonballs. Bulma: What do we do? We can't possibly fight Vegeta. And if he gets to the dragonballs before us, we're doomed. Krillin: There's no way we're gonna let him get to them before we do! Bulma, you've gotta leave now! Go back to Earth alone. We'll take care of things here! Just leave us your radar and Gohan and I will collect the dragonballs. Bulma: But...? Krillin: It's okay. Don't worry about us, I don't think we'll get into any trouble. We know what we're doing. Gohan: Yeah. Bulma: I understand. Sure, I'll leave you guys here and go back to Earth, but I'm coming back with Goku. But I think that you guys should know, that'll take two months. But what's two months anyways? Just sixty days! One thousand four hundred and forty hours. Eighty six thousand four hundred minutes. Five million one hundred eighty four thousand seconds, right? Krillin: Yeah, it's only two months. (Krillin and Gohan laugh) Frog Face: For you, Lord Frieza. (Zarbon and Dodoria step forward as Frog Face hands a dragonball to Dodoria) Frieza: Very good. Just three more to go now. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Dodoria: Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Zarbon: (softly) Hmm Heh Heh... Vegeta: My time on Earth was good for teaching me some brand new techniques! Cui: Yeah, right. Let me guess, you learned how to run away. Zarbon: I sent some men to the area where we noticed them before their power readings blipped off the radar screen. Frieza: I'm not concerned about them, Zarbon. It's Vegeta I want off my back. Zarbon: Cui will take care of him in no time. His power level is much higher than Vegeta's. I don't think you have to worry about seeing that monkey-tailed abomination again. Zarbon: Well, it involves the two men I sent to examine that power reading. I just don't know what to make of it. The power reading went right through the roof, right around the time of battle. Then it just disappeared again. There's someone else out there... Cui: He's even dumber than he looks. I can't believe he fell for the old look-out-behind-you trick. Dodoria: Well, it blipped for a second, then it went blank. It's probably just a cat or something. I wouldn't pay it any mind. Frieza: There are three things I refuse to tolerate. Cowardice. Bad haircuts, and military insurrection. And it is unfortunate that our friend Vegeta possesses all three of these. Dodoria: Hm... Frieza: What's wrong Dodoria? Does your scouter indicate something? Dodoria: I don't know. For a second, I thought I detected a very weak power level. And then it just disappeared. It's probably just a bird or a small rodent. Nothing that should cause us any alarm. Krillin: (Krillin and Gohan are hiding in the Namekian mountains) We gotta be careful, 'cause if they spot us, we're as good as dead. Yajirobe: (about Goku) You know what he is, don't you? Master Roshi: What's that? Yajirobe: Crazy. That's what! He's not even out of bed five minutes and he's already rushin' off to another battle! Goku: (about the capsule spaceship) So, how much longer till she's ready to fly? Dr. Brief: She's ready now. Anywhere in the universe you want to go. Goku: Uh...what?! Dr. Brief: And there's a full kitchen down this way...and to get to the bathroom, you follow the green arrows- Goku: Wait a second! I thought you said it wasn't finished yet! Dr. Brief: And that's the truth. It isn't finished. Far from it. I haven't installed the capuccino machine yet. Goku: What?! Are you kidding?! I don't care about cappuccino!!! Dr. Brief: Well, you say that now, but wait until you wake up and you want a nice warm breakfast beverage to start your day off right. Dr. Brief: Sometimes I amaze even myself. Oolong: Dr. Brief! Where's Goku? Dr. Brief: On his way to planet Namek. Probably wishing he had capuccino already. Dodoria: (Dodoria's scouter beeps) Lord Frieza. I'm picking up that power level again. Up there. It came from just over that ridge. I think someone's been watching us. Zarbon: You seem to have the situation well under control here Lord Frieza, perhaps I should go check it out. Frieza: I doubt I need an introduction, but just in case, I am the mighty Frieza and yes, all the horrible stories you've heard are true. Dodoria: How will I manage to control my fear at this power reading? They're at one thousand each. We shouldn't even bother fighting these guys. Zarbon: (about the Namekian warriors) Are you certain that their power level is just one thousand each? Dodoria: (Dodoria checks his scouter) I just can't explain it. Somehow, their power levels' at three thousand now. Dodoria: That felt about as strong as a bumble bee sting! Frieza: Dodoria? Dodoria: Yes. Frieza: Do you remember that first Namek Elder we visited. Doesn't our new friend here remind you of him in some way? Dodoria: He thought he could play dumb too. He said he had no idea what the dragonballs were. Heh heh heh heh. Dodoria: So, which one of you wants to be the first to feel my wrath? Namekian: Don't be ridiculous. There's three of us. You're outnumbered. Dodoria: Ha! Don't think there's safety in numbers here. I could take on twelve of you. Zarbon: (about Elder Muuri) We don't need him. Even without the scouters, it shouldn't be too difficult to find the next village. Frieza: Yes, Zarbon. You must've read my mind. Zarbon: (about Gohan and Krillin) Those two were fairly strong. Whoever they are, I suspect they're the ones who took out our scouts earlier. And if we're not careful, they could cause us even more trouble, perhaps I- Frieza: Zarbon. Zarbon: Huh? Frieza: You disappoint me. Could it be your faith in my power is beginning to waver? (Zarbon stares at Frieza as Frieza explodes an entire mountainside with the blink of his eyes) Heh heh heh heh. They are just a minor annoyance Zarbon. Nothing more. Dodoria: (after snapping Elder Muuri's neck) Just like they say, some you win, some you lose. Dodoria: (about Gohan and Krillin) If those little twerps think they can outrun me, they've got another thing coming! And when I get my hands on them, they're gonna lose a lot more than their eyes. Do you hear me!? I'm gonna tear you apart! I'm gonna rip you to pieces! And I'm gonna love every minute of it! Dodoria: You! Vegeta! Vegeta: It's been a long time Dodoria. How are you? Dodoria: I should've known. Shooting people in the back always was your style. Vegeta: Careful now. We're all alone. Frieza and Zarbon aren't here to back you up. I'd watch what I said, if I were you. Dodoria: Grr... Vegeta: Then again, I suppose it doesn't matter. I'm still going to kill you either way. Ha ha ha ha. Dodoria: You! You Saiyan trash! It's about time I taught you some respect! Dodoria: I'm surprised Vegeta. Heh. I was almost certain I'd have to pry that scouter from your lifeless fingers. And to tell you the truth, I'm more than a little disappointed it won't come to that, but oh well. We had a deal. Vegeta: I see. So you have lost your scouters. That's terrible. How will you and Zarbon ever find Frieza's backside to stick your noses in it? Dodoria: You're helpless without your scouter! And you're so dumb you destroyed the very last one! Now get out of here before I crush you! Dodoria: Here's my little secret, Vegeta. You remember how Frieza explained to everyone that your planet was destroyed by a massive meteorite? That's a lie. That's not the way it happened at all. I'm saying that it was Frieza and not a meteorite that destroyed your planet. You see, Frieza had been using the Saiyans to do his dirty work for years, as they are quite an impressive warrior race. Since no Saiyan could ever match Frieza's awesome power, they were easy to control. He would send the Saiyans to planets he wanted, where, if needed, they could transform into those huge, ape-like beings which your kind can become. In this state, they could easily clear out and level almost any planet. But over time, things changed. While Frieza could still easily defeat any Saiyan, several extraordinary fighters such as yourself, Vegeta, were beginning to emerge. You see, as a group, the Saiyans started to become a threat to Frieza and his power, a threat that had to be...dealt with. But you should be grateful, Vegeta. Since you were a prince of such talented skills, Frieza decided he would attack the planet while you were away. Personally, I don't know that I would have made the same decision about you, Vegeta. But then, it wasn't my decision to make. Dodoria: So now I've told you the whole truth about your home planet, and since I've lived up to my end of the bargain, I'll be on my way. Vegeta: You're not going anywhere. Dodoria: Wait a second! Vegeta: You will pay for your part in this, just as Frieza soon will. But I want you to know: I do this not for my planet, not for my race, but because you thought you could make the prince of Saiyans a slave to your whims! Vegeta: (after killing Dodoria) So long Dodoria. After all his boasting, in the end, he was nothing more than a sniveling coward. Ha ha ha ha ha. But still, I didn't think I would defeat him so easily. Ha ha. My powers have grown to exceed even my own expectations. Vegeta: I love it! I should've learned how to sense power levels a long time ago! There's a whole group of them dead ahead! A Namek village. Just the sort of place I'd expect to find a dragonball. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Frieza will have to search every inch of this stinking planet. But with my newfound ability, I'll always be one step ahead of him. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Just as I expected. Frieza hasn't been here yet. There's not a single corpse to be seen. Well, we'll see what I can do about that. Namekian: It's an invader. Namekian 2: What does he want? Vegeta: Which one of you is the Elder? I'm here for the dragonball. If you have it, get it. Namekian 3: How rude! Namekian Elder: I am the Elder. Now I must ask, what use do you have for the dragonball? Vegeta: That's my business old man! Where is it? Namekian Elder: I'm sorry. But I cannot give you what you are seeking. Only those who are worthy may claim the dragonball. Vegeta: Wrong answer. Bang! (Vegeta does a finger blast at the Elder) Krillin: Hey, Gohan...you know I'm sorry I got you into this. Maybe it wasn't such a good idea to come here. I mean, I wanna wish all our friends back to life but...if we try to compete with Vegeta...we're just gonna get ourselves killed. Bulma: (pointing at Dende) Hey, what's the deal with the miniature Piccolo? He's Namekian right? You sure it's a good idea to bring him here? Gohan: Sure. We saved him. Zarbon: It's been too long. Dodoria should've been back by now. Something must've happened. Maybe I'd better go look for him. Frieza: Forget him. If he isn't capable of dealing with two puny pests and a baby Namek, then I don't want him back. Continue your search for the last two dragonballs. Appule: But how will we find the Namek villages without our scouters? We'll have to search this entire planet. Zarbon: And that's exactly what we'll do. Don't worry Lord Frieza. We'll find them. Frieza: I expect nothing less from you Zarbon. Now leave all the dragonballs with me. I'll wait for you back at the ship. Zarbon: Hmm... Frieza: Come to me when you have the final two. And do hurry, I'd like to make my wish before I die of old age. Zarbon: (to Appule) I want you to go in that direction. Don't take on the Nameks yourself, they may have some warriors that may be too much for you. Just contact me if you find anything. Let's head out! Bulma: But um...well...How exactly did you father have a child all by himself? Dende: Uh...what do you mean how...he spit the eggs out of his mouth of course. Bulma: Oh, right. He. How silly of me. Wait, so what you're saying is he is actually a she right, a female. Dende: Female? What's a female? Krillin: I guess we just cross our fingers and hope we don't all get creamed. Oh, who am I kidding...I doubt any of us are gonna make it off this planet, I'm gonna die here, and I never even had a girlfriend. Krillin: It's...it's Vegeta! He's attacking one of the villages! That bastard! Those Nameks never even had a chance. Zarbon: Blast. I could kill that old Namek for destroying our scouters. Too bad he's already dead. Vegeta: We finally meet again Zarbon. What a surprise. I've already disposed of that useless Dodoria. Now I plan to do the same thing to you. Zarbon: What? There's no way you beat Dodoria by yourself. Vegeta: Aha ha ha ha ha...whatever you say Zarbon. Zarbon: I say you're lying. Vegeta: It's easy enough to prove. If you don't believe me, why don't you try me for yourself. Zarbon: You're a fool. You should know better than to disobey Frieza. Vegeta: Yes, so I've heard. But unlike you, I've never been suited to the life of a mindless follower. I'm through taking orders. I'm through cowering before Frieza like a dog. And I intend to see him grovel at my feet as soon as I've made my wish. Zarbon: You mean with the dragonballs... Vegeta: The winds of change are blowing Zarbon. Soon the power of immortality will be mine. And with it, I will rule this galaxy forever. Zarbon: You're dreaming. Frieza already has five dragonballs. It won't take us long to find the rest. Vegeta: Please, you're blind without your scouters. That's a liability I don't share. My powers have improved in more ways than you can ever imagine. Zarbon: Aha ha ha ha ha ha...so you've learned some new tricks then, it doesn't change a thing. What makes you think your abilities even hold a candle to Frieza's? Vegeta: I'd say you already know the answer to that question. Dodoria did too. And before he died, he told me everything. Frieza fears the Saiyans, which means he's afraid of me. Zarbon: Don't flatter yourself. What Frieza feared was the entire Saiyan race rising up against him. All alone you're no threat to anyone. Vegeta: Well, we'll see. Krillin: Whoah! Those power levels are incredible! Guess that's where Vegeta ran off to in such a hurry. Yeah, that's him alright. Must be fighting one of Frieza's goons or something. Well, good. I say let 'em fight. Maybe we'll get lucky and they'll take each other out. 'Cause if either one finds us...Hey, hang on tight kid. (Krillin grabs Dende and keeps flying in the opposite direction) We've gotta move. If we turn up the speed, we might be able to get to the eldest Namek while they're still fighting. Lets hope they're too busy beating each other up to notice. Zarbon: (after Vegeta deflects Zarbon's blast) You surprise me, Vegeta. Zarbon: Well, I have to admit. You do impress me Vegeta. Aha ha. Your fighting skills have come a long way since the last time we met, but not quite far enough. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Zarbon: (softly) Heh heh heh... Vegeta: So, I'm not strong enough to beat you, huh? Funny, because that's what I thought I was doing. Oh, wait, unless you're trying to tell me you've been holding back. Zarbon: That's right. You've figured it out. I knew you would. Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha! You crack me up! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Zarbon: Go ahead. Laugh if you want. I'm about to wipe that stupid smile right off your face! Vegeta: Heh! Zarbon: It's time I showed you my true power, so watch closely. This isn't something I like to do very often. You ever hear the saying beauty is only skin deep? Well, right now, you're only seeing the beauty. Vegeta: Is that so? Well, pardon me if I hadn't noticed. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! What are you going to do? Start making faces at me and hope you scare me away. It's hopeless. Zarbon: Now, you're being much to hasty Vegeta. Patience. You don't want to spoil the surprise. And it's a good one. Vegeta: Let's see it! Zarbon: Alright then. So be it. But consider yourself warned. (Zarbon transforms into his demonic reptilian form) Uaaaa!!! Vegeta: Huh! What the!!? Zarbon: Grrrr.... As I said, you only saw the beauty side of me before, now with great pleasure, I introduce you to the beast! (Zarbon begins to pummel Vegeta) Zarbon: And you wouldn't believe me when I told you you couldn't win! Zarbon: Enough of this! I'm through toying with you! It's time to end this little game right now! Zarbon: It's lights out for you Vegeta! (Zarbon piledrives Vegeta headfirst into the ground) Zarbon: (after defeating Vegeta) Heh, oh well. It serves him right for making me go to all the trouble of transforming. Now, I'd better get back to Frieza. He'll want to hear this news. Frieza: (to himself, about Vegeta) Miserable Saiyan monkey. Zarbon: Lord Frieza, it's Zarbon. Frieza: The door is open. (Zarbon walks in) So, did you find the village? Zarbon: No. I've come to tell you that I found Vegeta. You won't have to worry about him troubling us again. Frieza: Oh, so you say. What makes you sure? Did you use your power of transformation? Zarbon: Right. Frieza: I see. And you know for a fact that he's dead? Zarbon: Well, I didn't check his pulse, if that's what you mean, but I'm telling you it's highly unlikely he survived. A chance in a million really. Frieza: So in other words, you don't really know, do you? Zarbon: I know that I saw him fall into the water and not get back up again. Frieza: You should've gone in after him Zarbon. Now we can't confirm anything just because you didn't want to get wet. That's careless. And, it was careless to try and kill Vegeta before you even questioned him. How do you know he hadn't already found a dragonball and hidden it? Zarbon: Uh...I'm...I'm sorry Lord Frieza. I'll go back and look for him. Orin: Lord Frieza. I found another one of the villages. Zarbon: Huh? Orin: But it was completely destroyed by the time I got there. The dragonball was missing. Frieza: Missing? Orin: There was one villager left. He said a Saiyan took it. Zarbon: You were right. Vegeta must've hidden it. Orin: So, I took care of the Namek and got back here as fast as I could. Zarbon: Eh... Frieza: So, you're saying you killed the only witness? Orin: Uh...Lord Frieza. (Frieza performs eye lasers which obliterate Orin) Frieza: Take note Zarbon. Because you can expect the same to happen to you if you don't find out where that dragonball is. Do you understand? That is the price of careless mistakes. You had better hope for your sake that Vegeta is alive. Zarbon: Uh... Frieza: Appule! Appule: Yes, my Lord. Frieza: Open a line to the home planet. Send word to the Ginyu Force that I want them readied and on their way to Namek, immediately. And tell them they had better not forget their scouters. Zarbon: Ah... Frieza: I'll be expecting them in five days. Appule: Yes Frieza. Zarbon: The Ginyus? Lord Frieza, are you sure that's necessary? There's no telling what they'll do once they get here. I've got the situation under control. I can handle this without them. Frieza: I have a feeling we'll need them sooner than you think. Zarbon: Why? Is there something I should know about? Frieza: I destroyed the Saiyan's planet because I felt that if left unchecked, they might one day pose a serious threat. And it's beginning to look like I was right. Zarbon: Auh! Frieza: Vegeta isn't the only one that concerns me...there are others. Zarbon: What...what others? Surely you don't mean the one Saiyan and his son that Vegeta fought on Earth? Heh, I don't see how they could possibly worry you. Even combined, they were hardly a match for Vegeta. They're certainly no match for you. Frieza: Zarbon, are you telling me that I'm wrong? Is that what I'm hearing? Zarbon: No. Frieza: That's what I thought. Now go find Vegeta! I want that dragonball! Zarbon: Yes Lord. (Zarbon dashes off) Zarbon: The Ginyu Force?! Frieza isn't taking any chances. Frieza: These Saiyans are proving to be quite a thorn in my side. It seems the more they fight, the stronger they become. Of course, I'm still much more powerful than they are, but if they keep multiplying their strength, then who knows what they might be capable of in the future. Best to eliminate them now, before they get any stronger. Vegeta: (barely moving after the beating Zarbon gave him) I won't die like this. The dragonballs are mine. (Zarbon flies right in front of Vegeta's battered body on the ground, locating him once more) Zarbon: Hm...well well. So you're still alive after all. Lucky for me. But then, I guess it's not such a lucky thing for you now, is it? I'm going to have so much fun making you talk. (Zarbon pulls Vegeta back up by his arm and flies off with him, taking him back to the rejuvenation chamber for questioning) Zarbon: (to Appule, while watching Vegeta in the rejuvenation chamber) Well, let me know when he's ready. I want him to be healthy before I start torturing him. Zarbon: (about Vegeta's health) How is he? Appule: He's holding steady. I've managed to stabilize his vital signs for now. But he's still in critical condition. He may never regain consciousness. Zarbon: He's got to make it. You revive him at all costs. Do you understand? Appule: Yes sir. Zarbon: (to himself) If he doesn't recover, Frieza will have my head. Appule: Frieza's not going to be happy. At this rate, he'll never recover. I don't know, but it looks to me like the high and mighty Prince Vegeta really isn't so mighty after all, now is he? Teh hee hee hee hee. Well, I hope you do pull out of it, 'cause I'm gonna really enjoy watching Zarbon torture you to death. That oughta keep me for a while. Tell you what, I'm gonna go take a little break. Just promise, you'll sit tight till I get back. I wouldn't want you to wander off and get hurt. Teh he he he he he he he he. (Vegeta recovers) Huh?! Ahhhhhh!!!!! Frieza: So then, how is he? Zarbon: He...he should regain consciousness anytime now. Frieza: Good. Then I won't have to kill you. Zarbon: Yes, Lord. (an explosion occurs inside the ship) Huh...huh...what? What in the blazes was that? Frieza: Find out! Zarbon: Damn! It came from the recovery room! Frieza: Well, don't just stand there! (Zarbon and Frieza enter the recovery room to find it demolished along with Vegeta gone) Zarbon: Huh? He's gone! He must've flown off. Frieza: So go after him. Frieza: Go now! Do you hear me Zarbon? Zarbon: I'll...I'll find him! Frieza: You'd better, because if you don't find him within the hour, you'll wish you'd never been born! Zarbon: Vegeta! Vegeta, where are you Saiyan!? Believe me, as soon as I get my hands on you, I'm going to rip you to pieces. Frieza: Haven't found him yet have you Zarbon? Just remember, you have one hour to find him before I hold you completely responsible for his escape! Frieza: (sees his dragonballs have been stolen by Vegeta) Ahhh!!! My dragonballs!!! Where are my dragonballs?!! Zarbon: Ahhh!!! Vegeta!!! He couldn't've gone that far! Frieza: What are you waiting for, you fool?! Don't you think you've disappointed me enough for one day? Get out of my sight! Go find him! Now! Zarbon: Yes, Lord. Frieza: (angrily, to Zarbon) Get your act together! You're a disgraceable warrior! You don't deserve to be near me! Have I left anything out? Zarbon: No... Frieza: Like I said...you have one hour! (slams his tail on the ground) Zarbon: Yes, Lord. Zarbon: Damn! Where is he? Where is that puny Saiyan? If I only had my scouter, I could  find him in a heartbeat! What the-? I swear I heard something. If I don't locate him, I'll have to answer to Lord Frieza. Huh...ah...it's Vegeta! (notices it's Krillin who's flying) Wait! It's the weakling who saved that little Namek. Where did he get a dragonball? I'm sure Vegeta must be somewhere nearby. Huh? (notices Vegeta flying after Krillin) You're not getting away! Not this time! (Zarbon joins the chase) Vegeta: (to Krillin and Bulma) Well, the surprises just don't stop, do they? I've found a couple of Earthlings far from home with no one around to save them! And it appears that you have just what I'm looking for. (about Krillin's dragonball) Hand over the dragonball or die! Come on! Don't do anything stupid! Just hand it over! And I wouldn't intend to escape with it either, because if you tried something like that, the sniveling girl behind you would suffer the consequences. Now hand over that ball. (Zarbon arrives) Looks like we have company. Zarbon: (softly) Ha ha ha ha ha ha... Bulma: (about Zarbon) Wow! He's cute! I'll bet with his brawny good looks, he's come here to rescue me! Krillin: Not even close. Krillin: We're in trouble. Bulma: I'm in trouble. Krillin: Yeah... Bulma: (about Zarbon) 'Cause I'm in love. Krillin: Uh...eh...Bulma, I...uh...I really don't think he's here for a date. Bulma: You think he'd go on a date with me? Krillin: Come on, snap out of it already. Bulma: I wonder if he's noticed me. Krillin: He has, but not in the way that you're thinking. Zarbon: Vegeta, did you really think that you could escape me for long? Vegeta: Heh... Zarbon: Ah, another dragonball. How nice of you to track it down for me. Don't tell me you've joined forces with them... Bulma: (to Zarbon) Yoo hoo! Ha ha! Thank you for coming to rescue me! Vegeta: (about Bulma) Ha ha. Idiot. Zarbon: Those two don't concern me. All I want to know is what you did with the rest of the dragonballs. You can either tell me or you can tell Frieza, your choice. Vegeta: Try to make me talk. Zarbon: (softly) Aha ha ha ha ha ha. With pleasure. Vegeta: Well, get on with your little transformation then. Zarbon: Eh... Vegeta: You know perfectly well that you can't possibly defeat me unless you change into that hideous creature. Zarbon: Alright, now you've done it! No one insults me like that, Vegeta! For someone who looks like you, you have no right to call me hideous! I'd kill you where you stand but Frieza wants me to take you alive. Consider yourself lucky. Vegeta: Ha. The only thing I'm going to consider is how much pain I make you endure...before I end your pathetic little life. Come on, lets go, ugly! (The battle between Zarbon and Vegeta begins) Bulma: (about Zarbon) My hero! Krillin: Bulma... Bulma: (after Zarbon transforms) He changed into a monster! Krillin: And he's become even more powerful. Bulma: So much for that date... Zarbon: Vegeta! You're dead! Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha. Face it Zarbon. You're no match for me. I'm far stronger. Now would be a good time to start begging me to spare your life. Zarbon: Begging you?! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Your smart mouth won't be so noisy once I crush your skull. Vegeta: The first and last mistake you made was to underestimate the power of a Saiyan warrior. Zarbon: Eh...uh...grr... Vegeta: While so many others grow weaker during battle, we Saiyans become stronger. Zarbon: (with Vegeta's hand smashed through his stomach) Just give me the dragonballs and I'll let you... Vegeta: Don't make me laugh Zarbon. I told you. You're no match for my Saiyan strength. Zarbon: Wait Vegeta...maybe we could team up and take on Frieza together. (Vegeta smashes his arm clean through Zarbon's stomach and out of his back, sending him flying into the Namekian sea for a watery grave) Vegeta!!! Frieza: Zarbon's late. Namole: Ah...right...uh... Frieza: I tire of waiting. He should've been back by now. Either Vegeta has defeated him or he has failed in his mission and run away to escape me. I knew it. I should've dispatched the Ginyu Force from the very beginning. Namole: Ah...Lord Frieza, you'll be pleased to know the Ginyu Force has been notified of your command and are making preparations for immediate departure. I'm expecting confirmation any minute now. Frieza: There, you see. Now that's professionalism. Heh he he he he he he...oh, and Namole... Namole: Eh? Frieza: I'm afraid with the Ginyu Force coming, you will no longer be needed...ever. (Frieza blasts Namole to death) King Kai: I sense a powerful force is headed for planet Namek! Yamcha: You mean Goku? King Kai: No, there are five of them. Evil...it's the Ginyu Force! Yamcha: It's the Gin-who-what? King Kai: They're a...a highly trained and highly secret assault team. Across the universe, wars have erupted without warning...cities and civilizations have been demolished...planets left in ruin. All with no clear idea as to how or why such wars ever began, but I know who is responsible, a secret elite army called the Ginyu Force. The private army of Frieza. Yamcha: Well, now that we've been through your training, the only force they're gonna be is forced back home. Chiaotzu: Ha ha ha ha ha. Nice one Yamcha. Yamcha: Yeah. Yeah, I just made that up! Ha ha ha ha. Gohan: (about Krillin and Bulma) What did you do to them? Huh? Did you hurt them? Answer me! Vegeta: Actually, I never even touched them. But if you want, I could easily be talked into going back. Vegeta: Tell me, what's that thing in your hand? Gohan: It's just a watch. Vegeta: Ha ha ha. With all the scientific technology on your planet, you're trying to tell me that that huge device is a watch...? Gohan: It's an antique watch. Vegeta: We are the last of the Saiyans. That means we have to look out for one another. Understand? It's like...like the three of us are brothers. Haaa!! (Vegeta slams his knee into Gohan) Gohan: Ahhh!!!! Vegeta: Not too bright, are you boy? You're even a bigger fool than your father. And that's saying a lot. Go home. Go cry in the arms of your mother, little Saiyan. This is no place for a sniveling baby. Vegeta: You! I finally found you! You're going to learn. No one makes a fool out of Vegeta! Bulma: Ahh... Vegeta: Grrr...grr...now where's my dragonball? Bulma: Ahh...ahh...it's...over there. Vegeta: Grr...don't toy with me. Bulma: Ahh...I...I'm not. It's right there. Vegeta: I don't have time for these lies! Bulma: This...this can't be happening. I...I told him. Listen to me! It's right behind you! No! I'm too pretty to die! (Bulma wakes up from her nightmare) Vegeta: It seems Frieza's growing a bit restless. I guess he's not too happy that I destroyed his ship's main power core. Blueberry: Okay, if you don't want to talk to us, you can talk to Lord Frieza instead. Bulma: (about a dragonball sinking to the bottom of the sea) Wait. I don't need to get it. It'll be safe down there. And when Krillin and Gohan come back, they can jump in and pull it out. Come to think of it, this is probably the best thing that could've happened. Oh well then. Bulma: If I'm going to die in this place, I might as well go down fighting. I'll show that creep. He just messed with the wrong woman. Bulma: How many times do I have to tell you goons? I don't know where the dragonballs are! Blueberry: Yeah, yeah. We heard you already! But I'm sure a little visit with Frieza will help jog your memory. Blueberry: You got two choices! You can come with us or I can kill you here! Blueberry: (about the dragonballs) Now, tell us where they are! Bulma: They're in the sea. They sank to the very bottom. Blueberry: If you're lying, then so will you! Bulma: So...this is it. The place I'm gonna die. Bulma: Oh man! I almost wish I'd never heard of these stupid dragonballs. Goku: (pulls out a can of beer from the fridge) What's this doing in here? It's no good. (pulls out another can instead) There! Now that's what I'm looking for, a sports drink. It's much less filling and tastes great! Vegeta: (to Gohan) What? Am I supposed to be scared now just because you've gotten a little power boost? It changes nothing. You're still nowhere near my level. So go ahead if you want. Attack me. Your move. Dende: Hey, hey listen. Guru just told me there's some kind of powerful force headed straight for us. Gohan: Uh... Nail: What? Vegeta: What in the...who's this Guru. Krillin: Hey, he's right. Something is coming. Gohan: Yeah, that power level's huge. Krillin: Wait, I know. It's Goku. I knew he'd be here to save us. Vegeta: Kakarot!? Gohan: I don't know. Are you sure Krillin? It feels like there's more than one. Vegeta: No! Not them! One, two, three, four, five...it...it has to be...dammit all. Frieza's called in the Ginyu Force. Vegeta: (Vegeta picks up Gohan) You! No more time for games! Give me that dragonball right now! Gohan: I...I can't. I don't have it. Vegeta: Tell me where it is. Tell me and I promise no harm will come to you or your friends. But if I don't make my wish before they get here, we're all dead. Krillin: What do you think we are...stupid? You put him down, right now Vegeta. Vegeta: (Vegeta drops Gohan) Listen to me, don't be a fool. These are no petty henchmen Frieza's called. It's the Ginyu Force. Five men, each as strong as I am. Maybe even stronger. Gohan: Eh... Vegeta: And in a few moments, they'll be here with their new scouters. They'll find us and kill us all! Krillin: No. I...I don't believe you! Vegeta: Do you feel that power! None of us are strong enough to face that. We only have one chance. We have to use the dragonballs to make me immortal. Nail: I feel what the Saiyan says may be true. This is an evil presence that approaches. Krillin: Here's the deal. We use the wish on Gohan! Vegeta: The boy may have power but he doesn't have the fighting experience. It has to be me. Krillin: I can't do it! That would mean, our entire search would be in vain. Nail: But you would still have two more wishes. Krillin: Huh? Nail: Didn't you know? The dragonballs will grant you three wishes. Gohan: Three? Are you sure about that? Krillin: Not just one? Vegeta: Argh! We're wasting time! (Vegeta picks Krillin up) The Ginyu Force will be here any second. We have to use the dragonballs now before it's too late! Krillin: You're not giving the orders here Vegeta! Nail, are you absolutely certain that we'll get three wishes? Nail: Yes. Krillin: Lets go then. (to Vegeta) But, you try anything funny and the deals off, you got it? Frieza: (after the Ginyu Force do their poses) Well...that's quite an entrance boys... Frieza: At ease men. I have an important errand for you. Captain Ginyu: Thank you Lord Frieza. Glad to be of service. So lets get down to business. What is our mission? Frieza: It's quite simple Captain Ginyu. Your mission is to recover my dragonballs and bring me Vegeta! Captain Ginyu: Vegeta? Recoome: Hah. Stupid Saiyan. Burter: I always thought he was too cocky for his own good. Looks like that ego of his finally got him into trouble. Guldo: So you've finally shown your true colors Vegeta. Recoome: Yo! Earth to Guldo, what's wrong, have you got something in one of your eyes there? Guldo: I see revenge. Guldo: Oh you think you are pretty tough, don't you. Well this time you don't have Frieza to save your scrummy carcass. Oh how I've waited for this. Recoome: Hey I think you are forgetting something here. Frieza wants him brought back alive. Recoome: Yeah!! I get Vegeta!! Guldo: Oh you always win. Captain Ginyu : Now don't be a sore loser Guldo. Recoome: Yeah Guldo if you're lucky I'll let you finish him off. Recoome: Hey Guldo why don't you take the midgets, they're in the way. Guldo: What am I, the janitor? Burter: If I were a betting man, I'd say Guldo's gonna lose. Jeice: Teh. Obvious. Thanks for pointing' out the obvious Burter. Recoome: Hah! Guldo will kill them in under a minute. One chocolate nut bar says he does. Burter: Hah! You're on. Guldo: I knew I should've joined that Ginyu fitness club last year, but no...I had to go on that stupid chili burger diet. Guldo: (after raising a sharp tree stump to impale Krillin and Gohan) Shish Kebab anyone? Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Personally, I prefer mine well done. Guldo: (after Vegeta decapitates Guldo, his head keeps talking) No...no fair Vegeta. You cheated. This fight was supposed to be just me against those two alone Vegeta! Vegeta: There's no such thing as fair or unfair in battle. There is only victory or in your case, defeat. Guldo: You...you dirty Saiyan. Do you really think you'll get away with this. You're nothing. Just a stupid monkey. I belong to the Ginyu Force. Vegeta: Heh heh heh heh heh. Not anymore. Guldo: Yaaah!!! (Vegeta obliterates what remained of Guldo's head) Jeice: That's insane. The crazy bastard actually killed Guldo! Burter: Heh. We're in trouble. Recoome: Uh...I know. With Guldo gone our whole routine is ruined! We're gonna have to come up with a new one. Vegeta: (after unleashing a barrage of attacks against Recoome) See you in hell Recoome!!! Krillin: He...he did it. Incredible. That big oaf never even saw it coming. I never thought I'd hear myself say this, but...I'm sure glad Vegeta's on our side. Jeice: Uh...huh? Burter: Grrr...Uh...man that was close... Vegeta: Huh? Gohan: Uh...no...I...I...I can still feel his power level. He's...he's still there. Uh... Krillin: There's no way. He couldn't be. Recoome: Ha ha ha. Hi! (effeminate way) Vegeta: Grr... Krillin: Uh...eh..ah... (fear stricken) Gohan: This is crazy! He's not even breathing hard! What the heck are we gonna do!? Recoome: Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Nice try...but now it's my turn. Jeice: Oh, this is just great! You know how long it's gonna take ta wash all this dust outta my hair. Burter: Complain all you want. At least you've got hair. Frieza: Once I have the dragonballs, it will make a nice fireworks display to celebrate my immortality. Ah yes, I'll write the name of Frieza in lights across the galaxy. Soldier: You're kidding right? Frieza: I'm not...how do you say, the kidding type. It will be glorious. Recoome: (after piledriving Vegeta, he pulls him out of the ground) Hey now, what do we have here? Ha, looks like a vegetable ready to be picked. Recoome: (to Krillin, after having all his teeth knocked out by Krillin's surprise attack from behind) I would be pissed, but, lucky for you, I know a good dentist. Krillin: Uh...uh... (afraid) Recoome: Hey, Jeice, Burter, how about you guys let me kill this one too? What do you say...yeah, no? Jeice: (to Burter) Well, I guess you owe 'im one. Burter: (to Recoome) Alright. You've got yourself a deal. He's yours. But as soon as we get back home, you're treating us to lunch for a week. Recoome: Yeah, yeah. (to Krillin) You just cost me big, now I'm pissed. Recoome: (after knocking Krillin away) I don't believe it! My wind-up pose must be off or something. That kick should've sent his bald head skidding at least twice as far. Recoome: It's showdown time little kiddy, but in this picture, you're the one that's gonna be pushin' up daisies! Recoome: Ah, don't sweat it kid. I don't mind gettin' my hands dirty. Ha ha ha ha. Not when there's killing involved. Frieza: At last, I've searched so long and the dragonballs are finally mine. It's time to make my wish. Captain Ginyu: Lord Frieza, allow me to honor you by performing the dance of joy. (Captain Ginyu dances) Frieza: Uh, Ginyu, if you value your life...stop. Captain Ginyu: Oh, yes...Lord. Frieza: Ha ha ha. Oh, did I hurt your feelings? I'm so sorry. Get over it! This is my moment of glory! Don't spoil it for me! Captain Ginyu: You're right Lord Frieza! I don't know what came over me. You have a wish to make. The dance of joy can wait. Recoome: Well...who's the big man huh? Really kid, I've fought some stubborn characters in my day, but you...you take the cake. Heh heh, heh heh. Now! Let Recoome show you your doom! Jeice: Well, that's the end o' that. I don't think that kid's gettin' up this time. Burter: How could he? Recoome just snapped his neck. Recoome: (to Goku) Hey! Who the hell do you think you are!? You can't just barge in here! Jeice: This guy's pretty good Burter. It's quite an entrance he made. He's really fast, maybe even faster than you. Burter: Yeah, right. Give me a break. (checks his scouter) See, low fighting power. He's all show. You're too easily impressed Jeice. Recoome: Ha..ha ha ha ha ha ha. You must think you're some really hot stuff, huh? Ha ha ha ha ha. You're gonna beat us all by yourself, huh? Krillin: Oh man! What the heck is Goku thinking? That hundred times gravity must have crushed his brain! This is crazy! It's suicide! Recoome: What the heck are you smilin' about? You do understand that I'm about to kill you, don't you? Goku: Don't be so sure. Recoome: Uh...? Goku: You won't even lay a hand on me. Recoome: Uh...ha ha ha ha ha. Oh boy, that's a good one. He says I won't even lay a hand on 'im, guess I'll have to pound 'im with my feet instead. Recoome: (to Goku) My name is Recoome, it rhymes with doom, and you'll be hurting all too soon. I really am a man of many many talents. Jeice: Oy, did you hear that Burter? This guy gets in one lucky punch and he thinks he can take on the Ginyu Force. Burter: Yeah, Jeice. I think he must've hit himself in the head pretty hard when he landed here. He got Recoome by surprise, that's all. It doesn't make him tough, just lucky, right? Jeice: Right. I'm surprised he got a punch in at all. This guy's power level is way too pathetic to be a challenge. Jeice: Now say hello to the Ginyu Force! Jeice! Burter: I am your worst nightmare! Prepare yourself for...Burter! Goku: You wanna dance, or fight? Captain Ginyu: (to a group of soldiers) Ya look like a bunch o' hood ornaments. The purpose of striking a pose is not to become like a wallpaper. That's why we chant loudly when we pose, to draw attention to our magnificence. I know. I'll just have to raise the stakes a little bit. The best poser gets a candy! Captain Ginyu: (to a soldier) Idiot! You touched a dragonball! Didn't I specifically say before starting this tryout not to touch any of the dragonballs? Well, didn't I? (Captain Ginyu grabs the soldier) Soldier: Yes... (fear stricken) Captain Ginyu: And did you? Soldier: Oh...uh...yes. Captain Ginyu: Okay. (Captain Ginyu throws the soldier into the sky) Congratulations, gentlemen. You've managed to survive the first cut! But...I'm afraid tryouts are over. You're all tough guys, that's true. But you lack the one thing that sets all Ginyus apart...ha ha ha ha ha ha...style. Oh...oh...and gentlemen, one more thing. Run for your lives. Burter: (speaking through scouter) Jeice. Come in. Jeice. Do you hear me? Jeice: (speaking through scouter) Yeah, Burter. I copy you. Burter: I've got a new plan. Use the fire Crusher Ball, right, when you fire it, I'm sure he'll jump out of the way to evade it. Jeice: That's your plan? Burter: I wasn't through. When he jumps, I'll sneak in and crush him from behind. He might be fast, but I'm the fastest warrior in the universe. Jeice: Got ya mate. This is what you get for messin' with the Ginyu! Hiya! Crusher Ball! Burter: Dodge you punk! Jump now, what are you doing? (Goku smacks the Crusher Ball into another direction) Jeice: He deflected it! Burter: Damn you! Uh...oh...huh... Jeice: Uh...huh... Burter: Hey, where did he go? Huh... Jeice: Look out behind you! Burter: Huh!!! Jeice: Huh!!!!!! Huh.... Burter: Huh...huh...uh...huh...be merciful... Goku: Hi. Burter: How did you get behind me? No one's that fast! Grrr... Goku: Well, apparently...I am. Burter: Grrr... Burter: Who are you? Goku: My name is Goku and I'm a Saiyan, from Earth. Burter: Grrr...liar! I've defeated hundreds of Saiyans and none of them were faster than me! Goku: It must be my diet. I eat really wholesome foods. Burter: Your diet? Your diet huh? Well, I'm about to make my fist part of your diet! Oh, I see, playing it cool, are ya!? Well, you'll die even faster! Goku: (to Jeice) Listen, it's not too late for you to leave this planet, your choice, but if I were you, I'd get out of here. Vegeta: Don't be a fool Kakarot! He's destroyed more men than you can count! Goku: Don't you remember Vegeta? We let you go on Earth. Don't you think they deserve the same chance? Jeice: Man oh man! Burter! This is totally insane! I don't know who this guy is...or where he came from, but he's good. Jeez, I've never seen anything like it. Ahh...we never even touched him...now that's one bad dude. I'm bad...but man, I ain't that bad! Sometimes you gotta know when to go, go, go! (Jeice dashes away) Goku: (after Vegeta steps on Burter's neck, killing him) Hey, stop. Vegeta, that's enough! What're you doing? Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha. (Vegeta unleashes a blast at Recoome's fallen body, killing him as well) Goku: What's your deal? You know how to receive mercy but you can't give it. Too bad. I was hoping you might've changed. Vegeta: (Vegeta spits on the ground) Oh, they don't deserve any favors. They're scum, Kakarot! Believe me! Would they have taken mercy on your son and your friend? If you'd arrived ten minutes later, they'd be gone right now. You're too soft to be a Saiyan! That freak you let go could cost you your life! Goku: No way! Not him. Vegeta: He doesn't have to be stronger than you to beat you. He could take your kid hostage and make you walk right into their hands like a lamb. These people are ruthless savages Kakarot. They're warriors. And they'll do whatever it takes to win the game. And here you are, Mr. Nice Guy. They're going to chew you up and spit you out with that attitude! Goku: We'll see. I don't think having a little compassion is a disadvantage. Vegeta: You poor fool. A fight with Frieza is a fight to the end. And it will be your end. You're nothing compared to Frieza, Kakarot. Krillin: Uh...'scuse me, I'd hate to interrupt but who's gonna beat who here? You saw how Goku handled those guys earlier. He was in a league of his own. They couldn't even touch him. And this guy is supposed to beat 'im? Not likely. Gohan: Yeah! Vegeta: Kakarot's strong. But he's not strong enough. Krillin: Ohhh.... Vegeta: And besides, Frieza's been after the dragonballs, and if I know him, he's probably already made his wish by now...which means you won't be dealing with an all-powerful maniac, you'll be dealing with immortal! Captain Ginyu: Imagine. Working for the most powerful man in the universe. How's that for a 401K? Vegeta: This is just too convenient! Kakarot and Ginyu are back there clobbering each other to death while the runts are up ahead finding the dragonballs for me. It's almost too good to be true. Ha ha ha ha ha ha! I'll just wait until those idiot Earthlings find out what the password is, then I'll step in and make my wish instead. You know, if I've learned anything at all from this silly ordeal it's that I am a freaking genius. Captain Ginyu: That's right. As a matter of fact, I too share the coveted ability to raise my fighting power at will, you know! Goku: Huh? Jeice: That a boy, Captain! He looks worried now! You got this bloke right where you want 'im. (to himself) Heh! I should've known that the Captain would take care of business. It looks like I'll be gettin' my bonus in two weeks paid vacation after all. Bulma: (to her computer diary) Just a reminder to kill Gohan and Krillin when I see them and to kick Goku in the shin. I guess that's it. Jeice: (Captain Ginyu releases Goku from a stranglehold) No Captain! We had 'im! What in the world did you do that for? Captain Ginyu: I don't recall asking for your help Jeice! Jeice: But sir, why was I-? Captain Ginyu: Hotshot! You know better than to interfere with my fight! Do it again and you're through, do ya hear me? Finished! (to Goku) And as for you, super slick, stop playin' around! Enough with this bravado, I know you're still hiding your real power. Maybe you're trying to save it for when you meet Frieza. Well, don't be a fool, you'll never get by me without baring your all. Show me your perfect power so I can finally test the depths of my strength against a worthy opponent. Come on, lets get right to the nitty gritty! Well, what're you waitin' for, huh? I didn't know your friends had so much time ta spare! Goku: Alrighty then! It'll give me a good workout and I can also save some time. Captain Ginyu: It would have to come to this anyway. Besides, this way is much more civil. We don't have to get all bruised and beaten up. Goku: You know, you don't have to hurt other people for amusement. Helping people can be fun too. You should try it sometime. Captain Ginyu: Aha ha. Ha ha. Oh yes, yes. I can see it now. Captain Ginyu: protector of the weak and the helpless and the good. Look, don't try to reform me, just show me your perfect power. Goku: You betcha! Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh!!!!! (Goku powers up) Captain Ginyu: What? One hundred thousand! I...I...I didn't count on this! This is completely insane!!! (Goku keeps charging) It's still going up...Ahhh! One hundred and ten thousand! Jeice: Ah! Ahhh!!! Captain Ginyu: Hey, stop! Cut it out! This just isn't my day! (Goku keeps charging) Ah...I had you...I had you in my hands. I should've destroyed you while I had the chance. Jeice: Ahhh...ahhh...with all due respect Captain, this might be a good time to go and get Frieza. Captain Ginyu: Shut up Jeice! I can handle this! (Goku keeps charging) Ahhhhh!!!!! Captain Ginyu: Now lets see here...what? One hundred and forty thousand! No! It can't be! (Ginyu darts into the sea below out of frustration) Goku: I think your friend's having a nervous breakdown! Jeice: He's just cooling off mate. He'll be back! Captain Ginyu: So this is the real you? One hundred and eighty thousand! Astounding! Incredible! Jeice: Man, we should be getting the heck outta here right now! Yeah I've seen about all I wanna see! Goku: There's no need to be scared of me! Just say you're sorry for what you've done and leave and no harm will come to you! Captain Ginyu: What? Apologize? Goku: That's right! Captain Ginyu: We're the Ginyu Force! We...we never apologize. Uh... Goku: I'm sorry to hear that. Captain Ginyu: Uh...you don't scare me...w...we don't bow to anybody. Not even a guy like you. Although I must admit, we've never really faced anyone like you...you...oh.... Krillin: I can't believe it. You leave a girl stranded in the middle of nowhere and she's still gone when you need her. Gohan: This is a track from Bulma's air-skii. She took off somewhere. Krillin: Ahe he he he...great. A ruthless killer is about to find the key to immortality and she's out cruisin' somewhere. Captain Ginyu: Of course! I know what you are now! You're not an ordinary Saiyan! You're a...a Super Saiyan! Jeice: Ahhh... Goku: Call me what you want. It doesn't matter to me. Because the outcome is still going to be the same. Jeice: This is what Frieza was afraid of. This is why he destroyed the planet Vegeta! Captain Ginyu: Ahh! Why me? I am the great Captain Ginyu! Jeice: That's it Captain! Remember who you are! Sir, he's making you lose your composure and forget about style. Don't let him do it! Goku: My offer still stands! We don't have to fight! Captain Ginyu: Huh? Goku: You can still choose to admit you're wrong and leave this place. Alright, one or the other, lets settle this right now. It's your choice. Captain Ginyu: You're serious aren't you, you'd let us go? We could leave just like that? Goku: Ahum...yeah, why not? You're the ones who will suffer most for what you've done to these people. It's bad karma. Captain Ginyu: Bad karma? Goku: That's right. You'll have to reap what you've sewn. Captain Ginyu: Wait a second...something's not right here...Super Saiyans are supposed to be radically efficient killing machines. But this guy is as gentle as a lamb. He must not be a fully developed Super Saiyan...aha ha...which means, he still has weaknesses, and I think I just figured out what this guy's greatest weakness is...yeah, yeah, yeah...ha ha ha! I thought I was dealing with a lion here! But now I realized you're just a pussycat! Aha ha! You heard me! Eha ha ha. Yes, my friend, it's hard to win fights when you're way too forgiving. And I know you wouldn't even hurt a fly if you didn't have to, would you? Aheh Heh he he he he he he he... Frieza: Before you begin your pathetic struggle to survive, I should warn you. Your chance of winning is nonexistent. Frieza: Oh my! According to my readout, I may have underestimated your strength, but no matter. Your power pales in comparison to what I have in store for you. Not to say the light show wasn't impressive, but you see, I'm probably five hundred thousand times stronger than you are...so, in order to keep this a fair fight, I promise to refrain from using all of my powers on you, for they are obviously powers which you, my green little friend, do not possess. Nail: Grr... Frieza: Observe. My left hand...it's strength alone is enough to crush you like the little bug you are, so as a special one time bonus, today, I will fight you while my other hand is behind my back. So now that we've got the ground rules settled, shall we begin? Nail: Grrr.....I've had enough of you! It's time to fight! Frieza: (Frieza rips off Nail's arm and throws it in front of him) Here! You might want to keep it as a backscratcher! Frieza: (Nail grows a replacement arm) That didn't show up in the readout! The ability to regenerate one's own anatomy. I'll just have to make a copy of that power, because you never know when it might come in handy. Bulma: Why you!!! You don't even have the dragonballs? And here I am waiting, being chased by every wild beast imaginable, I haven't showered in weeks, not to mention I ran out of lip gloss a month ago, and you come back empty handed? Krillin: Huh? Gohan: (same time as Krillin) Huh? Bulma: So then, what do you have to say for yourself? Krillin: We...we are sorry. At least I think. Captain Ginyu: I got to admit, this new face doesn't look half bad. What do you think Jeice? Jeice: Lookin' good mate. Jeice: What the-? Look Captain. It's all seven dragonballs. Right there. They're all dug up. Captain Ginyu: (in Goku's body) How convenient. Hmm...Jeice, any ideas on who dug 'em up? Krillin: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Hey, Goku, it's me, Krillin. Me and Gohan were really worried about you. What took you so long, huh? (Captain Ginyu and Jeice snicker to themselves) Boy, for a second, I thought you were that Captain Ginyu coming. But you must've taken care o' him right? Captain Ginyu: First of all, Captain Ginyu was a worthy opponent. Now, how did you find the balls? Krillin: Ha! Would ya quit kiddin' around Goku. You know good and well that we used the dragon radar to find them. Jeice: A dragon radar? What the heck is that? Captain Ginyu: Uh...so, Krillin...have you made your wish? Krillin: Well, we didn't know...the password. Hey, do you know what it is Goku? Uh...Goku? Captain Ginyu: Maybe. Why don't I try. Krillin: Goku, are you sure you're feeling alright? I mean, you sound kinda strange. Is everything okay? And am I missing something, what are you doing hanging around with Jeice? Isn't he the enemy or did he switch sides? Captain Ginyu: Good question. Krillin: Eh? Gohan: Hey Krillin! That guy isn't my father! Jeice: Huh? Gohan: Look out! He's behind you! Krillin: Uh... Captain Ginyu: Aha ha ha ha. (Jeice does a rest in peace cross sign with his hands as Captain Ginyu smacks Krillin hard) Jeice: Yowooo!!! It's time ta face the fury o' the Ginyu Force! I'm Jeice! Captain Ginyu: And introducing, the new and improved Captain Ginyu! Jeice: Tell 'em what time it is baby! Captain Ginyu: It's time for you ta die! Captain Ginyu: Lets just say, I'm going to do to you two twerps what I did to him! Krillin: No, please. Wait a minute! Can't we maybe discuss this like gentlemen? Or at least give us a last meal. Captain Ginyu: (about Goku) Well, well. Look what the cat dragged in. I must say, you are one tough customer. Captain Ginyu: Jeice! Don't just stand there! Maybe you can help me a little bit here!? Jeice: Right. Coming. Vegeta: (to Jeice, after Vegeta sneaks up behind him) Hey, Snow White! How 'bout you pick on somebody your own size! Jeice: Pretty stupid to challenge me to a fight, eh tough guy!? Vegeta: Look who's chasing who, pal! Jeice: So, vegetable breath, where exactly were you hiding? My scouter didn't show you anywhere! Vegeta: Well, I guess it goes to show you how behind the times your useless Ginyu technology is! Time ta finish you off punk! I hope you realize that up until now, I've only been toying with you! Jeice: In your dreams Vegeta. That'll be the day, a wimpy Saiyan like you can beat even the weakest o' the Ginyu Force! And now it's time ta turn out your lights, ya loser! (Jeice gets a punch in) Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha ha. Jeice: Huh? Vegeta: Hee heh ha ha...I hate to admit this, but I must say, I'm impressed. You're a lot tougher than I thought. Jeice: Ha! Vegeta: Take a look at your scouter. And then you'll realize what you're up against. Jeice: I am, and that's what's so funny! But just to humor you, I'll check it again and see if I even get a reading. (Jeice checks his scouter) It's impossible. Noooo!!! (Jeice breaks his scouter) Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha! I think you broke it! Ha ha ha ha ha! Jeice: No kidding. Vegeta: You see, unlike the Saiyan you've been fighting, I get excited at the prospect of finishing off a warrior who's weaker than I...and you're much weaker. So do you feel like taking on a real Saiyan? Well, do you punk, because if you do, come and get a piece o' me! Jeice: Huh? Vegeta: Come on! I haven't got all day! I'm waiting. Heh. Lets get this over with. Jeice: Huh? Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha... Jeice: What? No way! Are you telling me you're a Super Saiyan?! Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. That's right amigo. I'm your worst nightmare live and in person and ready to rumble! So if you think you stand a chance against a Super Saiyan, be my guest! Jeice: I will defeat you! (Jeice unleashes a barrage of blasts only for Vegeta to break through and punch him hard) Captain Ginyu: (to Gohan and Krillin) I hope you're both wearing clean underwear because you're about to take a trip to the emergency ward. Goku: It looks like he's figured out my powers. Be careful Gohan! Captain Ginyu: Aha ha. Bingo! Ha ha. Give the man a silver dollar because Captain Ginyu's back in action. Get ready! The Captain's comin' ta get you!!! (to himself) Aw man, that attack line really sucked the big one. I gotta come up with somethin' better. Now what would a Captain o' the Ginyu Force say that sounds really tough? Jeice: If you thought you'd seen the last of me, think again! Vegeta: He ha ha ha ha! Ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Oh...Jeice, when will you ever learn you don't stand a chance against me, huh? Look, I'm really tired of wasting my time toying with you. Jeice: Grr...grr...grr...grr... (Jeice slams out of Frieza's ship, dashing upward, as Vegeta speedily appears in front of him in midair and does a combination of bonecracking kicks and chops at Jeice's body) Ahhh!!! Ahhh! Ah! Ah! Huh? Vegeta! No! Noooooo!!! (Vegeta unleashes a blast right in Jeice's face that obliterates him in midair) Goku: I guess that takes care of Ginyu. Just don't forget Vegeta. You owe me a big one. Vegeta: Right. But explain this to me Kakarot. What happened back there to Captain Ginyu? Goku: Aha ha ha...you don't get it, do you Vegeta? Take a good look at that frog over there and say hello to Captain Ginyu! Vegeta: What? Captain Ginyu: (in frog's body) Ribbit ribbit. Vegeta:  Well, looks to me like its frog stomping time! Captain Ginyu: (in frog's body) Ohhh! Ribbit ribbit! (tries to run away) Vegeta: Get along little froggy. Goku: Get a lode o' that would ya, ha, I'd say Vegeta finally has someone his own size ta pick on. Vegeta: Hm, whatever. Maybe I'll let him go. It's not like I wanna get toad guts all over my nice clean boots. Vegeta: You know destroying you three weaklings would be like shooting fish in a barrel. Gohan: You wouldn't! Krillin: I...I can't believe you'd be so low as to kick us when we're down like this. Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha! Goku: No. He won't hurt Krillin. Not if he wants to get his wish from the dragonballs. Vegeta: Heh heh heh heh heh. You know me too well Kakarot. And besides, I may need your Super Saiyan powers to help me take out Frieza...who is probably already on his way here. Goku: (after entering rejuvenation chamber room) Ahhhhh!!! A needle!!!? Ohhhhh No! I hate needles! Get me outta here! Get me outta here! Please, I'd rather be sick than get a needle! (tries to run off as Krillin holds him) Vegeta: Would you shut up already!? I'm not even giving you a needle. Idiot! Krillin: So what's this machine for, Vegeta? Vegeta: It's called an isolation chamber. It'll get Kakarot's strength back in no time. The liquid in the capsule is synthetic Saiyan DNA, which will penetrate his every pore and make him good as new. Krillin: Whoah! Mondo cool! Vegeta: (to himself) That's right boys. Mondo cool. Get a good look at him now, because once I'm through with Frieza, there'll be no need to resuscitate any of you three. Vegeta: This is the armor I was talking about. It's an older model than mine, but it should work almost as well. Krillin: Uh...call me nuts, but how do you put this thing on? Gohan: I don't know. I don't see any instructions. Vegeta: Slide them over your head...and if that doesn't work, I'll come over there and force them down for you. The armor's expandable remember...I was wearing it when I battled the two of you on Earth. Krillin: Uh... Vegeta: It expands to almost any size. Gohan: Oh, cool! Stretchy! He he he! Krillin: Hey Vegeta, are the shoes and gloves made out of the same material? Vegeta: Shut up... Krillin: Heh heh heh heh heh. Feels pretty elastic to me. Ha ha ha ha ha. Man, talk about having a spring in your step. Just think about it guys. We'll have the advantage in these suits when Frieza shows up. What do ya think Vegeta...uh, what's the problem? Vegeta: Nothing. No problem. Krillin: I don't mean to be picky, but your armor seems to give you greater mobility than these. Not to mention it looks better. Vegeta: Oh, excuse me. But uh...last I checked, this was not a fashion show. Gohan: Well I think they're both functional and stylish. Look you guys, see how easily I can move around. Krillin: Uh...are you positive you're okay? Vegeta: Yes. Would you mind your own business. Krillin: Uh...well sorry I asked. I would like to know one thing. How long until Goku is healed? Vegeta: I'm not sure. I'd say for his height and weight, it shouldn't take any more than an hour. Vegeta: In the meantime, you'd better keep your eyes on those dragonballs, 'cause if we lose those, I'm going to be totally pissed. Well, I think its time for a little nap. Gohan: You're taking a nap? Vegeta: Well, with you wearing that new armor, I feel real safe. (laughs to himself) Frieza: (to his scouter communicator) Ginyu Force, this is Frieza! Come in! Over! What...no! This can't be! Where are my soldiers? Why aren't they showing up on my scouter!? There's no way Vegeta and those miserable little punks could take down the entire Ginyu Force! If they're sleeping on the job, I will make them pay! Vegeta: (while Goku is in rejuvenation chamber) Ha. Get well, Kakarot. You'll need your strength to defend against Frieza. And later, to defend against me. Krillin: (about the password) So...you gonna tell me what it is? Dende: It's in Namek, and you probably wouldn't understand it even if I told it to you. Krillin: (about Porunga) Oh, man! He's...he's huge! Bigger than anything I've ever seen in my whole life! Gohan: Are you sure this is the dragon? Dende: Yes, Gohan. His name is Porunga. And in Namek, it means dragon of love, but to be honest, this is the first time I've ever had a chance to see him. Porunga: You have collected all seven dragonballs, and now, as it is written, think wisely and I will grant you three wishes within my power. Yamcha: Just count your eyes and add one. Tien: Uh! What do you know!? Yamcha: Well, I know this! I'm one of the three going back! Tien: Wait! No! You need to fix your hair. You should stay! Yamcha: Fix my hair? So I like to comb my hair a lot! At least I have hair, q-ball. Tien: Q-ball huh!? You jerk! Chiaotzu: Hey guys! Why don't we draw straws. Yamcha: Yeah right! There's one small problem. You and Tien are telepathic! Chiaotzu: We're not cheaters! How dare you! Porunga: Look, I'm enjoying the fresh air. But I don't have all day. If you can't make up your mind, just wish for nothing three times so I can go. Krillin: Wow. A dragon with a sense o' humor. Tien: I get it. I know what the deal is now. You saved Gohan's life and now it's payback time. Of course. Piccolo: That's not it. Trust me. Please. King Kai: Alright, I will. You're the only one not acting like a rabid dog. Krillin: Vegeta?! Vegeta: What's the matter? You two look a little surprised to see me. Gohan: Nothing really. Everything's fine. Vegeta: No, I don't think everything is fine. And I will tell you why everything is not fine. Because you two...you summoned the dragon, didn't you?! Shame on you! How dare you! I spoiled you with new suits, took you in, saved your lives. All of that and this is how you repay me!? Well you can kiss each other goodbye! Frieza: So you are the ones. Naughty. I don't see how three shrimps and a burnt out Saiyan managed to defeat the Ginyu Force, but now it's your turn. Don't worry. It won't hurt too bad. Really. Death is my specialty. Frieza: There doesn't seem to be any power readings for the Ginyu Force. So it is true. Heh heh heh heh heh. Somehow, you wimps have managed to destroy the most elite fighting team in the universe. Ha ha. What a farce. I only wish that I could've been there to see the look on Ginyu's face. Ha ha ha ha ha. What do ya say we get started...I know you are all anxious to resolve this dispute once and for all. I always knew that you would turn on me someday, Vegeta, but I never knew when. Now, I see that you were just waiting for the stakes to get high enough before you played your hand. A valiant effort but in the end it just didn't work, now did it? I hope you've thoroughly enjoyed your little rebellion, because now its over my restless little warriors. Now you die. I should've done this a long time ago. You ruined everything you little scumbag. How dare you stick your nose in my affairs? I could've been immortal. I hate you! Vegeta: Like I care if you hate me. I quit. I'm free now. To think I was nice to you all those years...makes me wanna puke. Frieza: Heh heh heh. That's right. Get it all out. Live boldly...even if it is only for a few more moments. Piccolo: (about fusing with Nail) Alright. You're on, but if I don't like it, you're out, understand me? Nail: Man, you're too much. Just wait. You'll be begging to keep me around. Piccolo: Yeah right. I doubt that. Now, tell me what to do, quick. Nail: Right. Just keep your hand right there. Piccolo: You can stay until we beat Frieza. After that, I'm gonna charge you rent. You got that? Gohan: What are we gonna do? Krillin: I...I don't know. Frieza: Well I do. You are all going to perish and it won't be pretty. Vegeta: Soon, I'll be a Super Saiyan! Your worst nightmare! Frieza: Hmmm... Vegeta: Aha ha... Frieza: A Super Saiyan, huh? Well, we'll cross that bridge when we come to it...heh heh heh...heh...that is if we ever come to it fool! Vegeta: Why don't you transform Frieza? Frieza: Hm? Krillin: Say what? Gohan: Tranform? Oh man. That doesn't sound too good. Vegeta: Well, how 'bout it Frieza, why don't you stop playing around and show us the real you? Frieza: So, you found out my little secret. Vegeta: That's right. Your loving minion Zarbon blurted it out. Gohan: Huh? Krillin: What's going on? Vegeta: The form of Frieza that you see standing before you is not what he really is. It's just a clever camouflage. He can transform to his real self at any time. He just uses this form to conserve energy. Frieza: Oh, you rude little ruffian. Please. I don't choose my real form because my power is too radical to control. Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Krillin: That's just great. Vegeta: Don't listen to him. He's just saying that to intimidate you. His power won't increase that much. Frieza: Heh. Is that so? Vegeta: Why don't you show us then? Krillin: Uh.... Frieza: Oh, alright. Heh, I'll bare it all. Heck, why not? Well, strap yourselves in. You're in for one heck of a ride. Ha ha. Oh, and Vegeta, I want you to know that any remote chance you once had of winning is about to go flying out the window. Oh yeah, I almost forgot, I think it would be nice for somebody to give me a countdown. Vegeta: Aw, come on! There's no way....that's ridiculous! Frieza: I'm waiting. Vegeta: Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one...ah...you happy? Frieza: I love it. You're too kind. Here goes. (Frieza begins to transform) Zarbon: (Frieza is drinking wine as Zarbon walks in) Lord Frieza! King Vegeta has arrived, escorted by a squadron of his men and he's requested an audience with you. Lord Frieza? Frieza: Zarbon, the last time I had my hearing checked, it was just fine. Zarbon: Right. Frieza: Open the doors. Zarbon: As you wish, sire. Frieza: (Frieza's wine spills on his leg because of King Vegeta's attack inside the ship) Why, those nasty monkeys. Zarbon, go ahead and open my door. Vegeta wanted an audience with me and that's what he's going to get. Zarbon: Right. Frieza: This is no way for guests on my ship to behave! Frieza: I say we torch the whole barrel of monkeys. What do you say, Zarbon? Zarbon: Is it necessary now that King Vegeta's out of the way? Frieza: Yes, because when one revolts, the others are sure to follow. You know, monkey see...monkey do. (turns to look at planet Vegeta) Just look at all those lost sheep waiting for the good news from their king. Vegeta: (to Frieza) Hey, who do you think you're fooling? You grew two inches and got rid of your armor. You call that a transformation? Frieza: Heh heh heh heh heh heh. Vegeta: Huh? Frieza: Vegeta, it pains me to see you going through this. What a waste. I favored you so much. Why couldn't you just continue to obey me? Vegeta: Obey? I just pretended to obey you, you fool. I've been waiting patiently for any chance I could get to destroy you once and for all. Frieza: Yes, you're just like your father aren't you? The good king. You probably don't remember your father very well, do you Vegeta? Krillin: (while Frieza transforms) Oh crap! Vegeta: Unbelievable! Absolute madness! Gohan: It was nice knowin' you Krillin. Krillin: Yeah...so long Gohan. Frieza: (after completing transformation) Heh heh heh! Well, this is it! I hope you're not disappointed! Frieza: (sarcastic) Oh...I beg of you...please don't hurt little old me. Frieza: The pain that you have caused me...I will return it ten-fold! Vegeta: (after blasting Frieza from behind) Alright! Rule number one, never turn your back...when you're up against Vegeta! Frieza: Don't look so surprised Vegeta! I'll be right with you, but first I must exterminate the mighty midget. Frieza: (when crushing Gohan's head into the ground) Sometimes, you just gotta put your foot down when it comes to kids. Bye bye brat. Frieza: These Earth scum tricksters. They're just like weeds. You have to get 'em by the root! Frieza: (while chasing Krillin) What fun! I love cat and mouse! This one's even small enough to eat! Yum! Frieza: (after Krillin dives into water to escape from Frieza) Ah...just what I needed. A little fishing to relax my nerves. I left my fishing rod at home. So I guess I'll have to blast him out! Piccolo: (about Frieza) I see. King Kai thinks he's unbeatable. We'll find out. Vegeta: You're right. We will. But who are you? Just another weak Namekian? Wait, I recognize you. You're the one we destroyed so easily on Earth. I can't believe these fools wasted their wishes bringing you back to life. Piccolo: Do me a favor. Just keep your big mouth shut. Then, after we beat Frieza, it'll be you and me...head to head. Vegeta: Yeah...like that's actually going to happen. Heh heh heh. Ha. I guess some people just aren't satisfied with dying only once, are they? Frieza: I suggest you go about your business Namekian. As of yet, I haven't decided to kill you, but I'm real close. Now go before its too late. Please, it would ease my conscience knowing that I spared one of you. Krillin: Call me crazy, but I've got a funny feeling that Piccolo doesn't have a clue what he's up against. Vegeta: Someone should tell him that. Gohan: I can't put my finger on it, but I sense something different about Piccolo. Krillin: The heck are you talkin' about Gohan? Gohan: The Piccolo I know would never fight unless he felt for sure he could win. Krillin: You think he has a chance? Vegeta: Would you two cut the crap! There's nothing different about your stupid green friend and there's no way he can win against Frieza alright!? Frieza: So you think you're pretty tough, huh? Well, it won't take me long to have you face first in the dirt begging for mercy. Piccolo: Give it a try! Frieza: You are quite the comedian Vegeta. If only the rest of your Saiyan people were around to see the brave prince Vegeta now, huh? But, ha ha ha ha ha ha ha...that really doesn't matter, because I've got you cornered like a frightened little mouse. Oh, don't worry, dear prince, I'm going to save you until I've taken care of your little Namek friend. Vegeta: (about Piccolo) He's even a bigger fool than I if he really believes he can take on Frieza by himself. But then again, I'm not that stupid to tell 'im not to try. Piccolo: (to Frieza) Well, I'm sure you're wondering, how I can anticipate your every move, right horn-boy? Gohan: What do we do now? Krillin: Don't worry Gohan! It's just like they say! It ain't over till the fat lady sings! Vegeta: Well, I'd say she just hummed a few bars. Frieza: Well, it looks like the tables have turned again my friend, and this time for the last time. So, are you ready for a taste of your demise? Because it's coming up right now. Piccolo: (while holding Frieza in a bear hug and piledriving him into the ground) Oh, by the way you cow-headed clown, I'm only getting warmed up! Krillin: (to himself, when Frieza is about to transform again) You know, it's times like this I think to myself, why didn't I just become a shoe salesman? Frieza: (after transforming) So, tell me...how do I look? I may not win any beauty contest but I'll beat your tail. Piccolo: You? Disgusting. Frieza: (about Gohan) Strange. Where did the little one get all his power? That kid's stronger than any Saiyan I've ever fought. Hmm...I better keep my eye on that one. I wonder who he is. I'm sure I eliminated all the Saiyans except for Vegeta, Nappa, and Raditz twenty years ago. How'd he survive? Neither one of those misfits could possibly be his father. No matter. In the end, they all must be exponged anyway. Frieza: The time is now. I must crush these miserable Saiyans...because they're like pesky insects. Once you let them get a foot hold, they can be hard to wipe out. Best eliminate them now, before they gain momentum. Vegeta: No, I'm not ready! Frieza: My dear, dear friend. Who is ever ready to meet their final fate, hmm? Now feast your eyes on my ultimate transformation. Vegeta: Come here, kid! You've gotta help me! If you know what's good for you, you will! You understand? Dende: But I can't help you! Vegeta: What are you saying? I know you can help! I've seen you heal other people! Dende: I can only heal those who have a good heart. You...your heart is black from the people you've hurt. Vegeta: Why...you little...unless you heal me you little brat, Frieza's going to wipe us all out! Dende: Sorry, I can't! Vegeta: Hey, come on! I don't have time for your stupid moral dilemma, kid! Piccolo: (about Frieza) In my wildest dreams, I've never seen anything so powerful...I wonder what it will look like. Krillin: I'll bet it's the most hideous, ugly, repulsive creature in the universe. Vegeta: (after Frieza kills Dende with his death beam) What happened? Gohan: No! No! Nail: Dende! No, it can't be! It just can't be! Piccolo: Frieza, you monster! Frieza: That's one down, and I didn't even break a sweat. Gohan: No, Dende! Frieza: Now, it's time to pull back the curtain and let the third and final act begin. Frieza: Well, well. You certainly surprise me with your newfound force. Vegeta: And I'm just warming up, you clown. What you just witnessed was only the beginning of my power. If you had one of your stupid scouters here, you'd realize my true potential and you'd run like the coward you really are. No matter. A Saiyan loves a good fight. And you'll discover my powers soon enough. So lets stop talking and cut to the chase. This time, you're going down. What's the matter? Is your brain another one of your weak and underused muscles. Frieza: Very well, you've had your fun, but I really do feel sorry for you now, because now you have to back up your delusional, pathetic taunts, Super Saiyan. Vegeta: Shut up! Frieza: Well, it looks like you're not that super of a Saiyan after all, huh? Gohan: What does this mean? Krillin: It means Piccolo was right and that Vegeta doesn't stand a chance against Frieza! Piccolo: No one stands a chance against Frieza! Frieza: Vegeta, face it. To fight with me is futile and useless. Just wake up. You're blind and delusional. Vegeta: Uh...? Frieza: You keep going on about being a Super Saiyan, but it's just a myth Vegeta. I've never seen one, have you? You're such a chump. Heh heh. Frieza: Such an ego. You really believe all that? A Super Saiyan? I must say, somebody has some high hopes. Vegeta: (to himself) Oh no. What if he's right. What if I'm not a Super Saiyan? That would mean I don't stand a chance against Frieza. That would mean I'm pretty much...dead. Blast it, it can't be true. Frieza: Don't worry. The pain will subside after a while. Frieza: (while pulling Vegeta by his hair) Vegeta. I must say I'm very disappointed in you. After all that Super Saiyan garbage you were spouting. (Frieza grabs a crab that was climbing on Vegeta's back and eats it) But I thought I should give you a sporting chance. (Frieza begins to ram his hand into Vegeta's back) Frieza: While you did put up a good fight, the bottom line Vegeta, is you are just as stupid as those other half-wits. But I can't help you. If you were to pledge your allegiance to me... Frieza: (to Vegeta) My, my. What do we have here? A fallen prince. Oh dear. (Frieza stomps on Vegeta's chest) It pains me to see you like this Vegeta. I don't know why, but I still care for you enough to put you out of your misery. Goku: You must be Frieza, the one responsible for the horrible chain of events that have taken place on this planet. Frieza: The proof is in the pudding, don't you think, huh? Goku: Whatever problems you have with Vegeta, you can take them up with me now. Frieza: Nice move but your shoe came untied. Goku: I'm not going to fall for that. I don't even have shoelaces. Frieza: Darn. I guess you're a little smarter than the average Saiyan. Goku: Very funny. Frieza: Ha ha ha ha. Goodness. No sense of humor. Goku: Save your strength, Vegeta. Vegeta: (dying) No. There's more. He killed our home planet. It was him. Frieza: He's just a corpse and he's still blabbing. I'll have to gag him to shut him up. Vegeta: Your father and mine...the whole planet...he blew it up, it's true. No one survived but us. Ask him if you want. He'll tell you. He's proud of it. Goku: Please, stop talking, Vegeta. It's sapping all of your strength. Vegeta: No. Listen. You have to hear this. (Vegeta begins to cry) We worked so hard for him. We did everything he asked of us and more. He took me from my father when I was just a little boy. He made me do whatever he wanted and said he would kill my father if I didn't. I did everything he asked but he killed him anyway along with everyone else. He was scared of us. Scared that a Super Saiyan would be born to rise up and overthrow him. Frieza: A touching story. Goku: Please, no more. Save your strength. Vegeta: Kakarot, please. Destroy Frieza. He made me what I am. Don't let him do it to anyone else. (Vegeta raises his hand to Goku) Whatever it takes. Stop him. Please. (Vegeta's hand falls to the ground as he dies) Goku: Vegeta. Frieza: Well, it's about time. Saiyans tend to linger like a bad odor. Goku: Goodbye, Vegeta. You're not as cold-hearted as you believed yourself to be. A heart of stone can't shed tears like you did. You must have been holding them back your whole life. I'm the only one left. Goku: (As he buries Vegeta's body) I think I understand you now. You weren't grieving over your own death, or because our home planet was destroyed. You were grieving because he turned you into what he wanted you to be. You never had a chance to be anything else. Well I still respect you. I know you made a lot of mistakes, but now I see that it wasn't all your fault. You had the fiery will of a Saiyan. Please share that with me now, 'cause I need it. Thank you for saving my son's life and buying enough time for me to recuperate. I'll do my best to carry out your wish. (to Frieza) It's true. Vegeta's right. You have no honor. For him. And for everyone else you've destroyed, I am going to finish you. Frieza: We'll see about that, won't we? Goku: You seem to delight in seeing other people suffer. And you treat life like a disposable commodity. You destroy homes. You take the lives of innocent, peace-loving people. You even take the lives of children. And all of this, for your own amusement or personal gain. Well, now it's your turn. Frieza: Oh, is it really? And I suppose the great Super Saiyan is going to arrive and magically defeat what has never been defeated. It's legend. Fantasy. Goku: Who cares? Look, I don't care about the stupid legend. See, it's me who's going to stop you. Bulma: (as she is lying down) That cloud looks like a cheeseburger. And that one looks like a pizza. I wanted to lose a few pounds, but this is ridiculous. Oh, I give up. I'm just going to lie here until I wither away. Goodbye, world. Frieza: (after whipping Goku into lava with his tail) A pity really. Such an uneventful ending and for such a great fighter. Piccolo: Hey, what have you done to him? Where is he? Frieza: Where is...who? Piccolo: You know who I'm talkin' about! Frieza: Oh yes. I seem to recall him melting in the river of lava. How would you like to join him? I'm making a stu down there and I wouldn't mind adding a Namek for seasoning. Yes, that's just what it needs. Perfect. Consider it done. Goku: Hey, just what's your deal anyway, Frieza? Frieza: Basically, I'm trying to kill you. Frieza: I've never met a sentimental Saiyan before. It'll be your downfall. Goku: Well, if having feelings is a weakness, why am I the only Saiyan left? Frieza: I was thinking and something just occurred to me. Yes, makes sense. You are the one who defeated the Ginyu Force, not Vegeta. Yes, you killed Captain Ginyu. Goku: That's right. Well, not killed. Changed. He was blue. Now he's green. Frieza: (after knocking Goku into the water) Ah. Flushed down the sewer like the little rat that he is. Frieza: Well, I've got to hand it to you. You're the first one who's ever hurt me besides my loving parents that is. Hm. It's been so long since I felt pain. It's such a strange sensation. What a rare case he is. Goku: Man, is he ticked! I wouldn't wanna be me right now, but I don't have a choice. Frieza: (while bouncing Goku around in a fiery burst) Now for the final swat. This game's over when you hear the bang! Goku: You fiend! Frieza: Don't try to flatter me. Frieza: I have a little proposition, I'd like to ask you in my native language. Goku: I'm listening. Frieza: Aloevi vi vivial. It means lets get down to business. No more sandbagging. What do ya say? Goku: Sounds good. Sure. Goku: So, this must be the place. Frieza: Yes, this will make a fine site for your grave. It's perfect. Now, would you prefer cremation or burial? Daisies or chrysanthemums? Goku: Whatever. You pick. I trust ya. Frieza: For that, I'm going to give you a little break. I know. I...I'll fight without using my hands, well how does that grab you? Goku: That's your call. Frieza: Fine then. This way I won't break my nails. Alright? Goku: It's up to you. But I don't recommend it. Frieza: You're too cocky. If you think I need to use my hands to beat you, I don't want you to die believing that you ever really had a chance to win. Goku: Okay, I'm not gonna argue with ya. Shoot. Frieza: Very well, then. No hands it is. Frieza: (while smacking Goku with his tail) Fool! I made you look! You dirty crook! You stole your mother's pocketbook! And one more for the road! Goku: (after grabbing Frieza by his tail) Man, when's the last time you had a bath? (Frieza turns to look at him) Yeah, no foolin'. Woo, it's downright unpleasant back here. Frieza: First you grab my tail and then you insult me. You're going to pay dearly for this. Bulma: (to the Ginyu frog) Did I mention to you that I'm a genius? Yup, I'm not just another pretty face. You know, I'm almost as smart as I am beautiful. It's scary. Frieza: (while choking Goku with his tail) Oh my, what's the matter, big guy? Did you expect a fairy tale ending? Well, don't lose your head over it. You can't always have it your way. Aha ha ha ha ha... Frieza: I really hate to break this to you, but I've been holding back the lion share of my power for the sake of amusement, but now I'm going to end this fight. But before I do, I'd like to make you an offer. Goku: I'm listening. Frieza: Join me. You have so much potential, it would be a pity to see it snuffed out and gone to waste. What 'dya say? Goku: I can't do it. Sorry. See, I have this nasty habit of following my heart. Frieza: Hm...and what does that get you? With me, you would live like a God. Yes, you could have anything. Or not, you could choose to suffer and die. Your call. Goku: No way. I have everything that a man could want. Frieza: Oh my. You are so naive. You know nothing of the pleasures of this universe. Any desire that you have could be instantly fulfilled. But have it your way. Die if you must. But allow me to let you in on a little secret. Goku: Huh? What's that? Frieza: Well, I haven't even begun to use my real power yet. Goku: Yeah well I have some reserved myself. Frieza: Yes, I know. Five. Five times what you've displayed, ten at the very most. But I...I've only used one percent of my power. Goku: Huh? What? Uh...no way! You're bluffing. It's just not possible. Frieza: Don't be glum. You should actually be flattered. I've never had to summon this much of my power to defeat someone. Fifty percent of my maximum. That's all that's required for this. Frieza: You're choosing to die instead of joining me? It's a real shame. Heh heh heh heh heh. You Saiyans are really something else. So proud. So obstinant. You're just like Vegeta and Vegeta's father and that radical Bardock. You're all alike. Too stubborn to recognize a good deal. Just like moths, rushing into a flame to die. But what can I do, you leave me no other choice. We could have been so good together. Frieza: (to Goku) Has it become clear to you yet? You never had a chance. I only let you think you did. Captain Ginyu: (while in Bulma's body, about Frieza pounding Goku) Incredible. Now that's what I call speed. I can't believe that I have the privilege of watching this fight. This is monumental, what a matchup. Gosh, this is the greatest battle ever, and here I am to witness it. Gohan: Bulma...I know the fight is a big deal and all, but it's really not a time to celebrate. Krillin: Bulma...Goku's not faring too well at the moment. Captain Ginyu: (Ginyu smacks Krillin back) Oopsie. Krillin: Ow. Captain Ginyu: Do me a favor. After the fight's over, remind me to kill you guys! Krillin: Huh? Gohan: Huh? Captain Ginyu: Oh...heh heh heh heh heh heh. Krillin: Well, if she's threatening us, I guess that means she's back to normal. Eh... Captain Ginyu: (while in Bulma's body, about Frieza beating Goku) Hee hee ha ha ha. This is great! Krillin: She's lost it. Captain Ginyu: It looks like Frieza's going to win after all. Hee hee hee hee ha ha. I should've known. Piccolo: Look. Shut up or leave and that's final! Captain Ginyu: Oh... Krillin: Are you sure you're okay Bulma? Captain Ginyu: Yes...I guess I got carried away for a second there. Sorry guys. (Bulma in the frog's body begins to toss little rocks at Captain Ginyu in anger) Gohan: Hey! Captain Ginyu: What's the matter guys...why are you looking at me so funny? You wouldn't hurt a lady, would you? Hm? Hee hee ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Krillin: Hey, look out! It's Ginyu! Frieza: (to Goku) I told you I could destroy this planet, in the same way I destroyed planet Vegeta. And please don't think me vain, but are you impressed by my handiwork? Frieza: (to Goku) I can do this one of two ways. Your end could be fast or painfully slow. Well, if you're not going to answer, maybe I'll make the decision for you. Frieza: My dear friend...how can I make this even more painful for you? I could crush your hands, rip off both of your ears, or maybe I'll just smash in your tiny little cranium. Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Goku: You might be stronger, a hundred times stronger than me, Frieza, and you may have me down, but I am not about to give up now! And I will do whatever it takes, even if it destroys me, to finish you off once and for all. To give you what you deserve. Frieza: Your speeches put me to sleep. But everyone has to have last words. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Before they're shredded into a million little pieces. Frieza: (to Goku) Oh, what's wrong? Poor baby got a boo-boo? Well, I'll make it better. (Frieza relentlessly pounds Goku's body around) Frieza: (Goku is out of energy and allows his head to rest on Frieza's shoulder) After all those things you said, I thought you hated me. (Frieza wraps his tail around Goku's neck) Well, I've really enjoyed prepping you for death. Frieza: (Frieza is holding Goku's head down under the water) Oh and don't forget to scrub behind your ears. Frieza: Something is strange about this warrior. How does a Saiyan have such incredible power? They are, after all, inferior creatures. I've never met a figher with that kind of strength. Grrr...I must take him out now. Frieza: (to Goku) I realize all you Saiyans want to do is fight, but fighting is useless, unless of course you are superior like me, and that is why I took the liberty of wiping out your kind. Goku: (to Vegeta's spirit) Vegeta, I grew up on planet Earth, I don't know how to be a Saiyan. But, I share in your disgust for Frieza. Frieza: Is your brave little speech over? Frieza: (to Goku) My guess is that you're all out of gas. You see, I can read you like a book, my friend. And it's time to finish the last chapter with a bang. Guldo: (about posing) We stink without our leader. Burter: Not to mention we're out of practice. Recoome: Lets give 'em some Ginyu spirit. Burter: Yeah, that's what we need! Ginyu spirit! Jeice: Then, lets do it again! Yeah! Yeah! Guldo: Yeah! Again! Again! Yamcha: Who are they? They're wacko! Jeice: Well, I can see that they're impressed. I've gotta admit, our fighting poses are awesome, no matter how many times we do them. Recoome: Oh, by the looks of it, this place seems to be a real nice planet. I think we should make it our new fighting headquarters. Guldo: Now that sounds like a plan! Jeice: And using our superior strength, we, the Ginyu Force, will conquer this planet! Yamcha: Tien, these guys are idiots. Tien: You can say that again. And if I'm not mistaken, wasn't it the Ginyu Force that took on Vegeta and got beat? Chiaotzu: Ah...I think you're right. Oh! Burter: So, you're friends with Vegeta, huh? That makes things a little clearer. We're the Ginyu Force, the most elite fighting force in the universe. Your friend Vegeta was an insignificant worm compared to us. Guldo: That's right. We woulda beaten that monkey with one blow except we ran into a little bit of bad luck. Recoome: Yeah, but that's all ancient history. Besides, we're here now and we like this place. And we're going ta make it our home. Guldo: So why don't you make like a hair and split! Yamcha: Hey! Who do you think you are? It's you who's going to leave! Chiaotzu: Yeah! Get lost! Guldo: Heh heh heh heh heh. Please. Don't make me laugh. Aha ha ha. Jeice: If they wanna fight, bring it on, 'cause I believe we all could use the exercise. Recoome: Oh...wait a second. Remember what our fearless leader said? When on a new planet, make sure that you test your powers first, because the climate might affect your ability to fight. Jeice: Hmm...you got a point there, Recoome. Alright. Burter: (after Guldo uses his telepathic power to smash a tree into King Kai's house) Nicely done. Jeice: On a scale of one to ten, definitely eleven. Guldo: Heh heh heh heh heh. Heh heh heh ha ha. Recoome: Wow, that was excellent, Guldo. Watch me! Recooooooome breath blaster time! (Recoome does a mouth blast) King Kai: What's going on out here? Yamcha: We have company. King Kai: Hmm...I have no time for intruders, so I suggest you leave. And I suggest you do it now. Recoome: Oooo, what a strange fellow. Hey, oddball! How would you like to come and play with us? King Kai: Heh heh heh heh heh. With your limited powers, I don't think it would be a very fair fight. Recoome: Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Oh, you're making a joke, huh? King Kai: Well then, why don't you try me and figure it out for yourself! Recoome: Okay! Frieza: There is one thing that truly agitates me, and this may sound strange. I never could quite understand your pathetic Saiyan mind. But that really doesn't matter now. I have no interest in your trivial little thoughts. I only want to rid myself of you once and for all. And after I'm all finished playing with you, I will take care of your bratty son and then the universe will be rid of your kind. Ha, Super Saiyan...don't make me laugh! Frieza: I spy with my little eye, one pitiable Namek who got away! Frieza: (while squeezing Piccolo's shoulder) You know, there's nothing more annoying than a screaming Namek. Burter: (staring at Recoome's body stuck in the ground) Hey, I think they did a number on Recoome. Jeice: Well, I say we pull 'im outta here and give 'im a proper burial. (Jeice, Burter, and Guldo pull out Recoome's body and Recoome shakes his head) Recoome: That nap sure was refreshing. And now it's time for the Ginyu Force to show you what we're really made of! Aaaaaaaaattack! (Recoome smashes into Yamcha) Jeice: Burter! Ginyu Force prepare! The hurricance attack! (Jeice charges his red aura) Burter: No one can survive the force of the hurricane! (Burter charges his blue aura) Frieza: (after Gohan and Krillin blast him) Heh. I forgot about those other insignificant little bugs. Heh heh heh heh heh. No matter. I'll crush them once I'm finished with these two weaklings. King Kai: It finally happened. Goku defeated Frieza! Goku has defeated Frieza! Woohoo! Frieza's been defeated! Goku has defeated Frieza! Ha ha! Woohoohoohoo! Yeah! Ha ha! Tien: So, he really pulled it off. Jeice: You think the old kook is tellin' the truth? Burter: I'd say he's nuts. Recoome: Impossible! Chiaotzu: Hooray for Goku! Tien: Yeah, I second that, Chiaotzu. Yamcha: I knew he'd win. King Kai: Way to go, boys! Your training paid off handsomely. You even surprised me with some of your techniques. When I invited the Ginyu Force here, I never thought you'd beat them. Yamcha: You invited those guys? King Kai: Uh...what I meant to say was that the Ginyu Force showing up here was as much of a surprise for me too...I mean it's not like I brought them here to help train you or anything...what a silly thought. So why don't we just forget about them, shall we? Good job, men! Good job! Woohoo! You know, I'll bet you three are glad I didn't invite Frieza himself here, aren't you? Get it? It's a joke. Krillin: Ahh! We forgot about Bulma! What are we going to do? Goku: Don't scare me like that, Krillin! For a second, I thought you saw Frieza again. Krillin: In...in some ways, Bulma's worse than Frieza. Uh...at least that's how I feel. Gohan: Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Goku: Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Piccolo: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Krillin: Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Goku: Ooo...ooo...don't make me laugh Krillin. I still ache all over. King Kai: Poor Piccolo. Poor, poor Piccolo. Yamcha: But I thought you said Goku defeated Frieza! King Kai: It's all my fault. I was foolish to think Frieza could be defeated. And he's more horrible than I ever imagined. Frieza: (after killing Krillin by exploding his body) Heh heh heh heh. Pop goes the weasel! Goku: (enraged) I won't let you...get away with this! Frieza: Heh heh heh heh! Goku: (thunder and lightning strike around Goku) Grr...grr...grr...I won't let you...grr...grr...yaaaaaaaaaaah! (Goku transforms into a Super Saiyan) Frieza: Huh!? Gohan: Ah...ah... Goku: Gohan! Listen very carefully! You must leave this planet now and take Piccolo with you. Got it? Gohan: Uh...uh...uh... Goku: Grr... This is the last time I'm going to tell you! Get out of here right now, Gohan! Goku: Gohan! It's time! Piccolo is our only chance of bringing the others back to this dimension. Take him to the ship and go! Gohan: But what about you? Goku: Don't worry about me now! I know I'm where I need to be! Gohan: But...if we take the ship...that means you'll be stranded out here with no way home. Goku: I'm your father. Now listen! Gohan! Just do as I say! Gohan: Whatever you want dad. Goku: (while tightly squeezing Frieza's hand) You just don't know when to stop! Enough is enough! Frieza: Owwwww! Goku: First Vegeta! Then Piccolo! And now, my best friend Krillin! You don't care, I can see that! Their lives mean absolutely nothing to you! You're not in the least bit sorry! Even now, all you can think about is how to destroy me! (Frieza barely escapes from Goku's grasp and begins to move his arm) Frieza: How? How did you get this incredible power? Don't tell me! It's true, isn't it? Frieza: Why do you loathe what I've done so much? Saiyans are just as ruthless as I am! They were killers, all of them! And you have the gall to condemn what I've done. You and your bloodthirsty race! Goku: They paid for their mistakes! Frieza: Heh heh heh heh. Is that why they died? I thought it was because I killed them! Goku: You're just a beast, with no conscience! Frieza: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! So I'm a beast, huh? Oh, and what about you, Mr. Super Saiyan! Aren't you just like me? Goku: Hmph. Frieza: So the jury's still out on that one. Lets just give it a little more time. Goku: (to Frieza) Your evil deeds are like a noose around your neck! Frieza: It can't be! Hey! Why can't I hit you? Just tell me! Goku: You didn't say please. Frieza: Please...what? Please!? You! Alright then! Please! (Frieza blasts Goku right in the face but it has no effect) Huh!? Goku: You can destroy planets, but you can never destroy what I am, friend! Frieza: (fear stricken) You...what...what are you? Goku: I am the hope of the universe. I am the answer to all living things that cry out for peace. I am protector of the innocent. I am the light in the darkness. I am truth. Ally to good! Nightmare to you! Frieza: (to Goku) Bah! Super Saiyan! So, out of the whole barrel of monkeys, one finally made good! Heh heh heh. Vegeta...he was sure that he was the one. Ha ha ha, when he was a boy, that legend was his only comfort. He tried so hard and failed. What a dope! He thought he was a jewel but he was just a dirt clot. Commander: Listen! Don't you men get it!? There are no individual races anymore! There are only two kinds of people now! Those who obey Frieza, and those who disobey him...and they never live very long! So which kind of people are we? Do we support Frieza? Good! It's better than dying, take my word. Now get back to work, you bums. Frieza: I'd destroy us both before I'd let you live. Either way, you'll never make it out of here alive! Goku: We'll see about that. Frieza: (Frieza makes his death ball) Guess what? I just had a brilliant idea. I figured out how to beat you! Goku: Huh? Frieza: Your power is amazing, but there's more to winning than that! Sometimes, it's the smartest one who wins, not the strongest. Heh heh heh heh ha ha ha ha! Aha ha ha ha! Goku: Huh!? Frieza: Now say goodbye to Namek! (Frieza throws his death ball at Namek) Die, planet, die! King Kai: It looks like Frieza won this one my friends. Goku had Frieza against the ropes. With his new power, Goku had Frieza totally outclassed in strength and speed. Yamcha: Then how? What went wrong? Chiaotzu: Maybe Goku's still okay. King Kai: No. I wish that were possible Chiaotzu. Frieza got desperate. He was losing the battle, so he used his trump card. He couldn't beat Goku, so he destroyed Namek. Yamcha: Destroyed Namek? But then, that means... King Kai: That means that there was no longer any atmosphere or air for them to breathe. I'm afraid it's all over. Frieza: Darn. I held back too much power. Goku: So, you couldn't do it. You couldn't go through with it after all, huh? Frieza: Huh? Goku: I don't blame you. Destroying both of us to make sure that I don't win isn't any way to fight. It's just another way of giving up. Frieza: You still don't get it, do you? Heh heh heh heh heh. I didn't plan on destroying myself, just you and the planet. Goku: Hm? Frieza: I can breathe in space and you can't. That means if the planet goes, then you won't have any more air to live on. And I shall be victorious. Five minutes. That's how long you have. This planet is still going to blow, the core has been completely disintegrated. Goku: Hmph. Five minutes is all that I need. It won't even take me that long to beat you and leave with my friends on my spaceship. Frieza: You underestimate me. The true depth of my power escapes you. Well then, it's time that you experience the ultimate Frieza! Yes, a very rare occurence indeed. One hundred percent of my true power! You never really had a chance to beat me! It's over! Goku: Can your body handle the stress from all that power? Frieza: Hmph. Goku: Well, I don't think that it can! In any case, I'm not going to give you the time you need to power up! This battle ends right now! Bulma: Those rotten skunks! This is it! I'm one ticked off damsel in distress! King Kai: (through telepathic conversation) Goku! This is King Kai! Can you hear me? Goku, please answer me! This is King Kai calling. Now look, I know you can hear me, Goku! You're just like all the others! You learn what I have to teach you and then you forget about the teacher! If you don't answer me, I'm going to start telling jokes, and I've got a million of 'em! Okay then, here goes. What did the penguin say to the astronaut? Goku: Alright, alright. I'm here King Kai. What is it? King Kai: Goku, why aren't you attacking Frieza? He's about to reach his maximum! This could be your last chance! Goku: I want him to reach his maximum! I wanna fight him when he's at his best! King Kai: What!? That's crazy! Ahh...Goku...is it possible that your new power has altered your judgement!? Think about it! Dr. Brief: There are only three things that could cause this transmission to fail. One...the darn thing's broke...uh...two...the whole ship's been destroyed somehow...and then there's three...interference from a series of electromagnetic waves, which means the planet's axis...it's being stretched or compressed. Master Roshi: Goodness! What does it mean when the axis distorts? Dr. Brief: Um...uh...well it means...uh...hmm...well a sudden change like that could mean only one thing. I'm afraid that the planet's core has become unstable. It's um...gonna blow! Master Roshi: What!? Goku: Frieza! Let's do this while we're still young! I will let you reach your maximum so there's no doubt who the strongest was when this is over. I could've already beaten you by now, but when you lose, I want you to know for certain that you gave it everything you have. That even at its fullest, your power was no match for mine! Frieza: Alright, big guy. Whatever turns you on. Frieza: (while struggling to get loose from Goku's grasp) Let go of me, you no good stinkin' dirty Saiyan! Goku: Not today! So this is it, huh? Your true power. Well, I'm not impressed! Frieza: Why you! You'll be much more impressed when you're dead! Goku: I wouldn't count on it. Bulma: Man, this is crazy! It's falling apart. My gosh, this is scary. This thing can blow at any second. This is bad. This is gonna be the end. Gohan: Hey. Think positive. Bulma: How dare you, you twerp!? You have no idea what I've been through, do you? It's been horrible. Gohan: Well, look on the bright side. Bulma: Bright side? I've been chased by dinosaurs, I had my body stolen by a crazy frog, I was nearly crushed to death, I have major rio and my legs are so bristly, I feel like a cactus, so tell me, what's the bright side? Frieza: As an expert on destroying planets, I'd say that you're just about out of time. Agreed? And yet you're standing there like a statue waiting for me to make the first move. It doesn't make any sense. The longer you wait, the worst your chances are. I know. You're stalling. Giving those kids a chance to escape. That's it. Heh heh heh heh heh. Well, that's okay. They'll be my next targets. It shouldn't be too hard to track them down, should it? Goku: Well, that depends. If you're dead, it will be. Bulma: Well, I'm not traveling across the galaxy with a shady character like Piccolo on board, who do you think I am? There's no telling what he might do once we're in deep space in the middle of nowhere. There's just no way! If he stays, you can count me out! Gohan: But he's not bad. He's good, really. And that's the truth. He's coming, or we're not going anywhere! Bulma: Huh! Now look Gohan. Piccolo belongs here. It's his home. I doubt he even wants to leave here. Gohan: Grr...grr... Bulma: Right...nevermind. Heh heh. (to herself) Oh, man. This is just great. How do I get myself into these predicaments? Gohan: (Gohan puts his hand on Bulma's hand to stop her from powering up the ship) We're not leaving Bulma! Not yet. Bulma: Please take your hand away or I'm going to bite it as hard as I can. Gohan: He's my dad, I love him. Please, Bulma, I know he'd do the same for you if he could. Please, my dad needs us. He does. Bulma: Gosh...Gohan...alright Gohan...two more minutes. Gohan: Thank you Bulma. Shenron: Speak. Name your wish. Say it now and it will be so granted. Mister Popo: Yes, of course. Can you please restore the lives of all those killed by Frieza and his gang. Is it within your power to grant this wish? Shenron: I...don't know. Mister Popo: It's very bad that you don't know. If you don't know, who does? Gohan: I'm staying Bulma. You're gonna have to leave with Piccolo. Bulma: What? Hey! This isn't funny. Gohan: I'm part Saiyan Bulma. Frieza's goin' ta hunt me down wherever I go. The last thing I wanna do is lead him back to Earth. I don't wanna be a danger ta anybody. I know what I've gotta do. Bulma: That's nonsense. Lets go. You're not sure that he's going to follow you! You really should get out of here before its too late. Gohan, no! Don't go! You can't put this all on yourself! Gohan: Don't worry about me. This is the way that I want it. I'll be alright. You take care of Piccolo. Bulma: Gohan, no! This is suicide! Gohan: No way. This is life. Piccolo would understand and so would my dad. Besides, I don't intend ta die. Frieza's bound ta be hurting if he was fighting my dad. Maybe I can beat him. I've got to give it a try. So long. Yajirobe: Yeah, but, well lets say that Goku wins and beats this Frieza dude. What good is that gonna do if the planet blows up? Frieza: The sky. It's black. Time to get out of here. She's about to blow. And I don't have enough energy to weather the explosion. Well, so long. You fulfilled the legend only to become a fresh batch of Super Saiyan soup. Ha ha ha ha. Frieza: (to Gohan) A pint sized Saiyan? Heh. You don't really believe that you could succeed where both your father and Vegeta failed...? Maybe you do believe it. It wouldn't surprise me to know that the last Saiyan to perish at my hands was just as foolish as the first. Darn shame. Isn't it? A noble race like the Saiyans completely extinct. Or am I speaking too soon? Perhaps you really are going to strike me down. Well, lets find out. Show me what ya got! Frieza: (to Gohan) Magnificent attack for a kid. You are a true Saiyan, which is precisely why I have to kill you. It seems that I have become the Saiyan exterminator. It's a dirty job but somebody has to do it. Tough luck, but hey...my hands are tied. So...this is the end of the road for you, kid. Frieza: Why am I not surprised? You Saiyans are like a stubborn virus. And now the virus has mutated to preserve itself. But I know how to treat it! I know how to blot it out for good! You should've never come back here, you know. I really thought you were dead. You could've left this place and escaped. I would have never known it. Goku: No way! Why run from somebody that you're not scared of? Frieza: Uh! Grr...hmm...just for that one, I'm going to blow you to pieces, just like that little bald guy! Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Goku: That little bald guy was my best friend. His name was Krillin. Yeah. How could I forget that? Grr...now die! (Goku gets enraged) Frieza: Fool. I'm not the one who's going to die here, catch my drift? Goku: Thanks, King Kai! You're the greatest! Alright, Frieza! Let's do it! Frieza: Now you're gung ho! What's the deal? Is your phone call over? Good thing they reached you before I disconnected your number! Bulma: I hate being unselfish! It's always such a drag! King Kai: (through telepathic communication) Goku. Uh, how many Super Saiyans does it take to screw in a lightbulb? Goku: How many? King Kai: There's no telling. But it only takes one to beat Frieza. Heh heh heh. Frieza: (after the dragonballs are scattered once more) The dragonballs! What? No! Come back! I waited so long. Goku: Heh, you actually beat that little guy to the punch, but it looks like you have to say the wish in their native tongue. But that was great! You almost had it. Frieza: Grr... Goku: You were so close, I could feel it. Frieza: That green kid. I could've sworn that I killed him. Goku: Yeah, I almost forgot! We used the Earth's dragonballs to wish back everyone that you killed. Frieza: What? Goku: Wait till I tell you the wish we just made here. Frieza: You mean you orchestrated this whole thing telepathically. Goku: I had help. We wished that everyone on this planet would be moved to the planet Earth except for the two of us. Frieza: Grrrrrrr! Frieza: In exactly two minutes, you will be nothing but a pile of ashes. Just look how you're trembling. Goku: It's you who should be afraid, because your spree of hatred will end at the hands of a Saiyan like you've always feared! Frieza: Your speeches are so poetic, but I can assure you that the only things ending are you and this ugly planet! Bulma: Oh! Why did you have to come back? Why didn't the dragon leave out those filthy jerks? Vegeta: Now that wasn't very nice! Vegeta: You're all so foolish to assume Kakarot would abandon such a good fight, because the blood of a Saiyan flows too strongly in his veins. And now, as that idiot martyr is becoming a Super Saiyan, his hunger for battle is even greater! Nothing will stop Frieza and Kakarot from fighting, that is, until Namek explodes and they both go out with a bang! Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Gohan: Don't laugh! Vegeta: Meanwhile, since I was revived from death, I should become even stronger, and once Kakarot and Frieza are both completely out of the picture, I'll be the most powerful fighter in the universe! Piccolo: You little... Vegeta: I must admit this was unexpected, but that doesn't mean I won't enjoy it! Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Vegeta: So now that you and I are the only Saiyans left, why don't we have a little fight to celebrate? It'll be a perfect opportunity for me to test out my new strength! Gohan: Just stop talking to me, jerk! I don't wanna have to listen to your stupid voice anymore! Frieza: Heh heh! You're really a Super Saiyan! I'm glad now that I finally met one. I can see it was quite an overrated legend. Frieza: See? Just a beast! Goku: Frieza... Frieza: What!? Goku: I'd rather be a brainless beast than a heartless monster, like you. Frieza: You think this is funny? Toying with me!? Goku: No, Frieza. There's nothing funny about this. Frieza: All that you've done to me, I'll pay you back ten times...no...a thousand times! (Frieza cracks the ground with his legs) Oh, yes. Stupid Saiyan! You will pay for this! Goku: Your energy level is decreasing with every blow. In fact, you're not even a challenge to me anymore. It wouldn't be fair for me to keep fighting you. I'm satisfied now. Your pride has been torn to shreds. You've challenged and lost to a fighter who is superior to you and to make it worse, he's just a monkey, right? It would be meaningless to fight you now, you're too scared and ashamed. Live with the shock. Keep it bottled up inside you. Silently. Goodbye, Frieza, never do mischief again. May you live the rest of your life in peace. Frieza: Peace? Nonsense! Never! I will never...never be defeated! (Frieza throws his disc attack at Goku) Frieza: (while having his disc chase Goku) Round and round the monkey goes! If he should stop, then off with his nose! Aha ha ha! Goku: I just don't understand you, Frieza. I tried to help you. Vegeta: (Vegeta, Nappa, and Raditz kneel before Frieza, Zarbon, and Dodoria) Greetings, master Frieza. We have returned from the planet Shikk. Everything was done as you desired. They pledged loyalty to you after only three short days. Frieza: Hmm. Did they really? I'm surprised it took so long. Ha ha ha ha ha. Nappa: Huh? Dodoria: Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha! Aha aha! Zarbon: Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Frieza: Ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Very well, then. You may go away now. Raditz: Huh!? Nappa: Huh!? Hey, wait! Is that all you're gonna say to us? (Zarbon and Dodoria step forward) Zarbon: Grr... Dodoria: Grr... Nappa: We just crushed an entire race of people in only three days, and all you can say is...is- Frieza: Tell me, Zarbon, how long do you think it would take you to conquer a planet like Shikk? Zarbon: Well, I imagine one full day would be enough. Frieza: Really? A whole day? It is a tiny planet. Aha ha ha ha ha! Aha ha ha ha ha ha! Zarbon: Heh heh heh heh heh heh. Dodoria: Heh heh heh! Nappa: Grrr....grrr...grrr...grrr... Frieza: Is there anything else you'd like to report to me? You do understand I have more significant matters to attend to... Nappa: Grrr...you cocky little...grrrr... (Nappa runs at Frieza) Vegeta: Nappa! (Nappa stops in his tracks and doesn't attack, realizing the futility of his attempt) Nappa: Uh... Frieza: Aha ha ha ha ha! Zarbon: Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha... Frieza: Aha ha ha ha ha ha! Zarbon: Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha... Vegeta: Please, excuse us, master Frieza. Zarbon: Aha ha ha ha... Dodoria: Heh heh heh heh... Zarbon: (to Frieza, about Vegeta, as Vegeta walks away) What more can you expect...ha ha ha ha...from a monkey. Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Vegeta: Grrr... (Vegeta keeps walking away) Zarbon: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Nappa: I hate this. You know, I've been hearing talk about how our whole planet was destroyed. At first, I didn't believe it, but now, they say it didn't really collide with another planet...like we thought. Raditz: What do you mean? Nappa: They say that Frieza did it. Raditz: Huh!? Why? Nappa: Grr...Vegeta, you have to listen to me! It was Frieza that ordered it all. To have your father killed and to blow up our home planet! Vegeta: I already knew that. Nappa: What? You knew? But how can you obey Frieza when you know what he's done to us? Vegeta: So, he killed my father, destroyed my people. That means nothing to me now. Strength is the only thing that matters in this world. Nappa: Huh? Vegeta: Everything else is just a delusion for the weak! There's only one certainty in life. A strong man stands above and conquers all. I know how strong Frieza is. There's no way I can beat him now. But wait and see, as the last of the Saiyans, we have flowing through our veins the blood of a warrior race. The more we fight, the more powerful we become. And with each fight, I'll get stronger and stronger...grrr...and one day, I'll be strong enough to beat Frieza...and I will rule the universe...exactly as I was meant to. Frieza: Heh. An afterimage, ay? That's a pretty good little trick for a primate. Goku: I don't understand why you call Saiyans by such mindless names. The only thing it does is reveal your own fear and ignorance. Frieza: Grr... Goku: I guess name calling is your only attack. Because you're too weak to challenge me any other way! Frieza: [thinking to himself] No one talks to me like that. Goku: (after Frieza is halved by his own disc attack) Though you brought all this on yourself, it's a shame that your life had to end in such a miserable way. Frieza: (coughing) Uh...eh...uh...eh... Goku: I wanted to save you, Frieza, but you wouldn't let me. And now you will have to share the fate of the planet Namek, which you yourself destroyed. Frieza: (coughing) Uh...eh...eh...eh...eh Goku: I'm tired of fighting. I'm going home. Goodbye, Frieza. Frieza: Please...help me...you can't leave me here. You can't let me die like this. Frieza: You have to help me. Don't let me die. Please, have mercy. Goku: How many people begged for their lives at your feet, and you killed them anyway? Did you show me mercy when I asked you to spare my best friend Krillin?! Frieza: Please, please. Forgive me. Goku: Ha! (Goku gives Frieza some of his own energy) Frieza: Uh...eh...eh...huh? Goku: I gave you some of my own energy. You should be able to move. Go and do as you like with it. You're on your own now. Frieza: Well, little Saiyan, since you seem to have all of the answers, tell me this. What do you suppose I'll do with this energy? Goku: You told me you could survive without any air, didn't you? Then why don't you go out into space and just drift for a while, that way you'll have plenty of time to think about your defeat. Namekian: They're not here! Muuri: What? Who's not here? Namekian: We've looked everywhere and we can't seem to find anyone from Guru's village. Namekian 2: But that can't be! Vegeta: Are you talking about those whiny villagers I defeated? Muuri: Huh? Vegeta: I believe the dragonballs brought back everyone who'd been killed by Frieza or his henchmen, isn't that right? Well, that doesn't include me. How very sad. (the Namekians get angry at Vegeta) Guru: (about his imminent death) Oh, you mustn't be sad my children. I have lived a full and blessed life. Don't be afraid. Death is simply another stage of our life. Frieza: (To Goku as he is about to leave) I'm afraid the planet is about to go boom! So, where do you think you're going? Hmm? You know you can't survive in space! Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Oh, you can run all you want, but sometimes you'll have to meet your problems head on! Face it, monkey! You're going to die! Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Frieza: Well, aren't ya gonna keep running, monkey? Aren't ya? Heh heh heh! Like a little circus chimp! Come one! Come all! See the spectacular chimp in a maze! Where will he run today? You don't have enough time to get back to your spaceship and Vegeta destroyed mine. Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. A plee, just for my sake, don't stop running. It's far too entertaining! Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha! It's ironic. After all your heroic efforts, you're still going ta die! And I will live on! So much for the awesome power of the legendary Super Saiyan! Can't even beat a dead planet! Goku: Maybe not. But it was enough to beat you, Frieza. Frieza: Poor stupid Saiyan! You honestly think you've won? Your puny mind never could understand! I am Frieza, the most powerful being in the universe! And you are nothing but a beast! A fragile animal! You can't win, because I am mighty! And you, are not! Now learn! Learn what happens when you mess with the most powerful being in the universe! (while Goku flies away, Frieza blasts Goku from behind) Goku: Huh? You fool! Ha! (Goku throws back his own blast, which goes through Frieza's and hits Frieza, completely burning his body) Frieza: Ahhhh! Ahh! Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh! King Kai: Just as I feared. There is no more planet Namek. It's gone. Sorry you guys. I know how much you cared about 'im. Yamcha: (to himself) No! Goku! You sacrificed everything! King Kai: Goodness gracious. I guess I need to give the bad news to Gohan. It'll break his heart for sure. Oh, boy. Oh, boy...how can I tell him? Yamcha: (speaking telepathically to Bulma) Bulma! Can you hear me? Bulma: Huh? Who said that? I must be losing my mind! Yamcha: Bulma, you're not losing your mind. It's me, Yamcha. Bulma: Huh? Yamcha? Where? I don't see you. Piccolo: Huh? Gohan: Huh? Bulma: I can hear you though. Did somebody shrink you or something? Yamcha: No, nobody shrunk me. I'm full size. Look, Bulma. I'm communicating with you telepathically. King Kai arranged it. I'm relaying a message for him. Bulma: No way... Gohan: Bulma? Yamcha's talking to you? It's King Kai, he must have a message. Bulma: Hey, that's what he said. Man, that's wild. Telepathy, huh? So, it's true then. It is Yamcha. Hiya Yamcha! What's up? Yamcha: Not a lotta! Just hangin' out with the other dead guys. You know how it is. But hey, I have to hurry, because uh...I'm sorta calling long distance. It's about Goku, Bulma. The fight on Namek is over. Bulma: You're kidding. Who won? Yamcha: Goku did. He beat Frieza. But uh... Bulma: Goku won! Alright! That's our Goku! Hey guys! Goku won! Gohan: Wow! Dad really won! Yay! Woo! Ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha! Piccolo: (to himself) Goku, you did it my friend. Gohan: (dancing around with Dende) Ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha! Dende: Aha ha! Aha ha ha! Vegeta: (to himself) He did it. Unbelievable. Yamcha: Bulma, please listen. That's not the end of the story. There's more. After Goku defeated Frieza, he tried to use Frieza's space ship to high-tail it outta there, but the darned thing bugged out on 'im. He was stuck, with no way out! When Namek exploded, Goku went with it! He's gone. Bulma: Hold on guys! There's more! Goku didn't make it off planet Namek before it exploded. He's dead. Yamcha: Huh!? Bulma: What a bummer. Yamcha: Bulma!? What are you doing? Are you nuts? You're not givin' a weather report or announcing the score of a football game. The kid's dad just died. I could've done a better job than that. Bulma: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Duh. Now listen up, peabrain. I'm the one with the real inside scoop, not you. What would you say if I told you that with the dragonballs from Namek, you can wish people back to life more than just one time? That means we can wish everybody back. Goku, Krillin, and Chiaotzu can all be wished back. You're all coming home. How do you like them apples? And it's not gonna take that long either. So just chill. You dork, I was always the brains of the outfit when we were together and you were always the brawn. Yamcha: Oh man. Same old Bulma. King Kai: Using the Namek's dragonballs is a great idea. But I'm afraid it won't help Goku and Krillin! Chiaotzu: Uh? Yamcha: Huh? Tien: Why not? King Kai: Well, when the dragon restores someone's life, he brings them back to the place where they died. But Goku and Krillin died on Namek. Yamcha: Oh, I get it now. Namek isn't there. King Kai: Yes. You hit the nail on the head. Namek's gone. What a shame. It was a great idea. Chiaotzu: But can we try it anyway? King Kai: Of course you can. But I already know what would happen. Trust me. It's not something you'd wanna do to your friends. They would materialize in space, right where Namek used to be. And die a lonely death in the middle of nowhere. Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha ha! I told you, didn't I? It looks like my prophecy came to pass after all! I'm number one now, guys. So get used to it! It was nice of your dad, kid. Getting rid of Frieza like that for me. What a guy. He served his purpose. Gohan: Jerk. You're nothing compared to him. He spared your life twice! Vegeta: He shouldn't have been so soft, should he? Which leads me to the question of what to do with his son. Destroy him now so he doesn't destroy me someday? Don't sweat it kiddo. You're the only Saiyan left besides me. That makes you a very important young man. We're the last survivors of an ancient race. Besides, I need someone like you at my side to polish my boots and call me lord Vegeta! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Gohan: My dad'll be back! You watch! Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Your dad is history, kid! Vegeta: (after pounding Gohan into the ground) Pity. What a waste of talent. Bye. (Vegeta tries to blast Gohan to death and Piccolo appears behind him) Huh? Piccolo: Not today. Back off. Vegeta: Ha. Have it your way. Gohan: Please, father. Come home. I know you're still out there somewhere. You have to be. I need you dad. Vegeta: A tough guy like you should be able to face the truth. Goku: I won't give up. I will not give up! Muuri: Do you know of a place where we can stay temporarily until we can make other arrangements? Bulma: Gosh...hey I know! Just stay with me! Muuri: No, we mustn't impose. Bulma: Ah, hey, it's really no biggie. It's the least I can do for you all. Besides, you need a major credit card to stay in a hotel. Hey, no worries. My dad's compound is huge. There's enough room for everyone. It's not like you guys have a lot of options. Green men from outer space aren't a common sight around here. Muuri: Oh, gosh. I see your point. We accept. Bulma: (to Vegeta) What about you? Hey, homeboy! Vegeta: Huh? What? Home...what? Bulma: Hey, loosen up. You're going ta need a place to crash too. Vegeta: Bah! Bulma: Hey, why don't you drop the arrogant tough guy act and just relax. Let it all go. Take a vacation for goodness sake. Unwind a little and see what life has to offer you. You're actually kinda cute. Aha ha. Vegeta: What? I'm not kind of...shut up! Gohan: Sorry we're late. I had to finish my homework. Bulma: Don't sweat it kid. You're fashionably late. Reporter: (after seeing Porunga) This is skycam 6 with the five o'clock traffic report. I quit. I don't get paid enough for this! Porunga: Silence. It can't be done. The one called Goku refuses to return and says he'll come back later. Gohan: What? But why? Master Roshi: I know why! Because he's scared, that's why! Of the one more powerful than a Super Saiyan...his wife! Chi-Chi: What? (holding a sword ready to strike Master Roshi) Master Roshi: Yikes. No, please no. It was a joke. King Kai: (after Bubbles keeps bouncing around in front of King Kai with flowers in his hands) Grrr... Yamcha: Where is Bubbles? He's gone. King Kai: Well, the hand is quicker than the eye. He knows better than that. (King Kai had slammed Bubbles in the head with a hammer in order to quiet him down) Gohan: (as he watches Krillin leave with Maron) I wonder if she's...yeah...she is! She's Krillin's girlfriend! He did it! Ha ha! After all these years, he finally found a girlfriend! Garlic Junior: Now Popo, where is Kami? Mister Popo: I don't know. Garlic Junior: You're lying. Mister Popo: No. Mister Popo does not lie. Garlic Junior: For some reason, I believe you. Mister Popo: Yes, that's because I don't lie. Garlic Junior: Bah! You disgust me! Hah! (Garlic Junior shrinks Mister Popo) Hmm. Pint sized Popo! Don't bother trying to escape! That tidy little energy field is impregnable. Ah, there you are. You look so scared. Don't worry. I'm not going to kill you yet Mister Popo. All in due time. All in due time. Bulma: What a day. This is great, all of us here together. Yamcha: Really. Hey, speaking of together, are you guys officially dating? Krillin: (shy) Well...sort of. We're not boyfriend and girlfriend. Maron: Huh? Oh, so we're still free to date other people? Well then. (to Yamcha) What do you say we go out? Yamcha: Yeah...uh...sure. Why not? (Bulma pulls Yamcha's ear) Bulma: Say what? Puar: My goodness. Yamcha: Come on Bulma. We were joking. Right, tell her Maron. Maron: No, I'm serious. Krillin: Oh no. Bulma: Enough kidding around. Maron, you haven't said much about Krillin. What makes him so special to you? Maron: Gosh. That's a good one. (pause) Uh...well...he's bald! Garlic Junior: You were lucky last time. If it wasn't for that kid, I'd be sitting on your throne already. Kami: In your dreams. I'll die before I let that happen. Garlic Junior: Ha ha ha ha ha. Oh my. I couldn't have said it any better myself. I'm taking over and you are going to die! Garlic Junior: You see, boys...our army of darkness has always been here. We just have to wake it up. Spice: You're a genius lord Garlic. What a brilliant plan. Salt: Yeah. You've really outdone yourself this time boss. Garlic Junior: Why, thank you. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Maron: Come on. Loosen up. Chi-Chi: Huh!? Who are you!? Maron: A friend. I was invited here, but I don't think you were. Chi-Chi: Grr...alright you! You'd better stay out of this! Maron: Heh heh. You're just a jealous old lady. You should go home. Your grandson's obviously not here right now. But I can see why he needed to get away. Chi-Chi: (enraged) Why you! (charging up) That does it! I hope you like black and blue 'cause you're gonna be wearing it for a while. Krillin: Babe, you've gotta be more careful. Maron: Who? Me? Krillin: Yeah you. That's not an ordinary lady you're lookin' at there. Chi-Chi's one o' the strongest women on the planet. Even Goku's afraid of her. Maron: You've mentioned him before. Who is he? Krillin: He's my friend. The one from outer space...remember? I told you about ten times. Krillin: Gohan, wait! Gohan: No! I'm not scared! These freaks did something to my mom! Mustard: We sure did. So? Gohan: So you'd better change her back right now! Salt: Hee hee hee. We can't, you dope. Only the sacred water kept at Kami's lookout can do that. Gohan: Sacred water? Vinegar: That's right. But Kami's on an extended leave of absence. Spice: Too bad ey? But don't worry. Our boss is guardian now. Garlic Junior. Gohan: Grr... Spice: Oh, I see you remember 'im. Lord Garlic will be pleased. Vinegar: Yes. Indeed he will. Spice: Give up kid. You're outnumbered. Spice: (to Gohan) It's no use kid. The more you struggle, the tighter the hold becomes. It's hard to believe that a small fry like you trapped Garlic Junior in the dead zone. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Vinegar: Good, yeah. This'll be fun! Piccolo: Fun? You slither around in the darkness waiting to capitalize on people's weaknesses, and you call that fun? Salt: Garlic Junior can destroy you anytime Piccolo. He has Kami held captive you fool! Piccolo: What? Garlic Junior's back? Spice: Admit it. You've always had a fascination with the dark side Piccolo. Why don't you join Garlic Junior now while you still can? He's about to take over the planet. Piccolo: Yeah right. Don't make me laugh. Come on, how could someone stupid enough to get caught in his own trap take over a planet friend? Mustard: Ey! Watch your mouth! Salt: You're gonna wish you never said that lizard boy. Vinegar: You're lucky that lord Garlic ordered us ta take you in alive or I'd finish you off right now. Piccolo: How did your brainless boss escape the dead zone? Vinegar: Alright, that's it. You're dead. Spice: Hey...heh heh heh. Settle down, Vinegar. He's just trying to get you riled up. I'll answer your question Piccolo, if you really want to know. (pointing upward) The power of the Makyo Star. Piccolo: Go on. How? Spice: Ah yes. Now I have your attention. Not long ago, the autumnal equinox was on the first point of libra. Heralding this auspicious moment for the dark side was the Makyo Star, whose proximity to the Earth provided an incredible source of power to all creatures of the night. This rare alignment of the planets and stars occurs only once every twelve thousand years. At no other time is man more susceptible to evil than this. It is a time when the powers of darkness are at their zenith and the unseen lower forces dominate the Earth. Garlic Junior used this influx of dark energy as a springboard to shatter his prison and escape it forever. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. You don't get it do you? Garlic Junior is the new guardian of the Earth. He's taken over Kami's lookout and is seated quite comfortably on the throne. Kami and Popo are just mantle pieces now, looking on hopelessly from their little glass jars. Piccolo: Huh? Gohan: Uh? Krillin: Great. We're in trouble. Spice: The beautiful part about it all is that with the black water mist, we hardly have to raise a finger. Just look how eager your friends are to help us. We're gods to these plebians. Vinegar: We're like celebrities to all these people, kinda like the role models an' all! Mustard: Yeah! Dig it man! You should join us! You would love it. They worship us. And soon they're gonna be like that for good. Gohan: Huh? Krillin: What!? For good? Salt: Once twenty four hours passes by, the change becomes permanent. Not even the sacred water can change them back. Spice: Heh heh heh heh. You came here looking to fight us, but the battle has already been won. There's no one left to fight for, nobody wants your help. Can't you understand that? Just look. Look at your friends. Do they look like they're waiting for a knight in shining armor to come and rescue them? Who do you think you're fooling anyway? You haven't really changed. So drop the goody two-shoes act and join us. Or oppose us and suffer like you've never suffered before. Your choice. Well? Spice: (about Piccolo) His Namekian body is having a strong reaction to the venom. Vinegar: Too bad. Lets put him out of his misery. Spice: Vinegar, stop. We mustn't kill poor Piccolo. Without him, we won't be able to use the dragonballs. Vinegar: Do I get to kill him later then? Spice: 'fraid not. Why should we hurt a friend? If you're bitten by someone who's been infected by the black water mist, you become just like them. Piccolo's one of us. Yes, wake up. You're part of the family now. Soldier: (in a battlefield of dead bodies) My word. So this is what my people get for being loyal servants to Frieza. How could he order Vegeta to do this to us after all we've done for him? Vegeta: Fool! No one tells me what to do anymore! Especially Frieza! Soldier: You dare to defy Frieza? (Vegeta lifts the soldier by his uniform) Vegeta: Look! I did not come here to fight with you! It was you and your idiotic friends that started it in the first place, now tell me where Goku is! Soldier: I've never even heard of him. Vegeta: If you're lying to me, I will rip your head off! Soldier: Heh! We're protected under Frieza's treaty. You're the one who's going to get it. Vegeta: Really? Is that so? The treaty you signed with Frieza is no longer valid! Because in order for a treaty to exist, the one who signed it must be alive and Frieza's dead. A Saiyan by the name of Goku destroyed him. Soldier: Frieza killed by a...a monkey? What a joke. Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha. I don't remember telling a joke, bird-face! Soldier: Grr... (the soldier pulls his blaster up to shoot Vegeta and Vegeta crushed it with his hand) Ahh... Vegeta: You just made my day. (Vegeta blasts the soldier to death) Yajirobe: Alright! How did a dog ugly guy like you score that chick? Krillin: Hey, cool it on the ugly stuff. Spice: (to Gohan and Krillin) Well boys, what do you think of Piccolo now? He's all set to serve Garlic Junior. That's because he's become part of our family! He's one of us kid. Just like your mother is. Garlic Junior: Ah, I see the son of Goku has arrived. I believe your name is...Gohan, right? Welcome here, my friend. I hope you don't mind but...heh heh...I have a question for you. I want to know where your father is. Gohan: My father? Garlic Junior: Precisely. I must find him in order to carry out my revenge. Once that is accomplished, then both you and he will pay double for your failed attempt to defeat me. Gohan: No. Garlic Junior: Even though now I rule the Earth, that isn't good enough until I exact my revenge upon you two. So young Gohan, tell me where your dear father is hiding. And I warn you, don't try to be smart. Gohan: My dad would never hide from the likes of you. And besides, where he is, he doesn't even know your evil kind exist. Garlic Junior: Where he is...what do you mean by that? Gohan: I'll never tell. Garlic Junior: Huh? Gohan: So don't bother to ask me that question again! Salt: Alright, you heard him. Why don't we get started. Prepare ta get whooped! Vinegar: Hey, don't whoop him too bad. Save some for me. Spice: But two against one wouldn't be fair, would it? Salt: Ah, like they say...all's fair in love and war. Hee hee hee hee hee. Come on kid, lets play. I haven't got all day. Garlic Junior: Aha ha ha ha. Oh, isn't this wonderful Kami? I've always believed that revenge is so sweet. Salt: What are you waiting for? Well, if you're not gonna make a move, then I guess I will. (Salt pummels Gohan) Krillin: Gohan, I'm comin'! Mustard: Hey, hold on! Where ya goin'? It's my turn ta play with you! (Mustard repeatedly slams his knees into Krillin's face) Salt: (while pummeling Gohan) Aha! What's wrong kid!? You don't wanna fight with me? Oh please! I thought the son o' Goku was a little tougher than this! My sister can take a punch better than you! Maron: Hey, Yajirobe and the talking cat! Korin: Hey hey hey! The cat has a name you know! And it wouldn't hurt for you to show a little respect! Maron: Whatever. If it makes you happy. Korin: We were talkin' the talk, now we have to walk the walk. Yajirobe: Yeah, and like they say, the way to a woman's heart is through her stomach. Korin: What? Oh. I guess that pretty much explains your strike-out record with the women. Yajirobe: You know, I think Marron has taken a shine to me. Korin: Ah, but once she tastes my coconut shrimp casserole, she'll be all over me. Yajirobe: In your dreams, catnip breath. Maron: (from afar) Oh boys, can you please hurry. I'm simply starving. Korin: C-coming my precious. Yajirobe: Poor cat's headed straight for heartbreak city. Salt: (about Gohan) That kid's sure got a lot of moxy. Mustard: You're not kidding. He's on fire. Salt: Well, I think you should have first crack at 'im. Okay? Mustard: Remember what he did last time? I say two against one is our only option against him. Garlic Junior: Aha ha ha ha ha! Excellent work Piccolo! Yes, once he was young Gohan's mentor, but the tables have turned...and now, Piccolo will destroy the rodent for me! Kami, I have a surprise for you! I wouldn't want you to miss the moment Gohan becomes part of my family! Spice: That's enough. We'll take it from here Piccolo. Vinegar: Our revenge for Mustard and Salt! Spice: Ahhhhh!!!! You're mine, maggot! (Piccolo attacks Gohan instead) Vinegar: What's he doin'? I thought you told 'im ta leave the kid ta us... Spice: I did. But remember...Piccolo and Gohan hate each other. That hatred has been pent up in Piccolo for years and probably was released when he breathed in the black water mist. Vinegar: Oh. Garlic Junior: Hmph. That's what you get when you send a Namek to do a man's job. Garlic Junior: Well, on the bright side, at least you'll get to see the bottle of sacred water before I terminate you. Gohan: How dare you? Spice: Don't take another step forward if you know what's good for you. Vinegar: That's it! (Vinegar knocks Gohan away) Garlic Junior: Don't you get it Gohan? Whether you breathe in the black water mist or get bitten by someone who has, it's all the same. You become one of us. And your only mission is to serve me, the almighty Garlic Junior. Spice: Why don't you join us? You're the only one who's left kiddo. Vinegar: 'Scuse me sire, it'd be my pleasure ta rid you o' this roach. Spice: Unless of course you would like the honor of finishing off the little ratbag yourself, my lord? Garlic Junior: Nah, have fun boys! Krillin: I guess it's true what they say...you can't trust anyone anymore. Heh heh heh. Garlic Junior: Grr...grr...grr...grr... Gohan: Krillin, you and Piccolo are really good actors. I didn't suspect a thing. You two were acting, weren't you? Krillin: Heh heh heh heh heh... Piccolo: Hmph, with Kami and Popo as hostages, that was the only way I could get close enough to Garlic Jr. to release them safely. Kami: Thank you for freeing us Piccolo. We are eternally grateful. Piccolo: Spare me your thanks. I didn't rescue the two of you because I wanted to Kami. Kami: Hmm... Piccolo: The only reason I did it was because with you captured, I can't fight at my maximum power. Kami: Yes, of course. Soldier: (after Vegeta fatally wounds a bunch of Frieza's soldiers) Please sire. Please forgive us. Forgive us for ever doubting the incredible power of Vegeta. Vegeta: A lesson learned too late. Ha. Did you poor fools actually believe you had a chance against me? When will they ever learn? Those who do not bow down before me shall suffer my wrath. Out here I have no equal. Not even Frieza was enough of a match for me. But there is one...Kakarot. Where are you...? Garlic Junior: So Piccolo, aren't you worried about Kami? I'd be worried if my mind and body were linked to that decrepit old prune. It would be such a tragedy if something happened to him, huh? You'd certainly have a tough time surviving without him. And with Kami gone, I bet you wouldn't talk so tough. Piccolo: Ha. If I were a coward like you, your words might scare me. But, I'm not. Garlic Junior: I want to show you something. My source of power. (pointing upward) Behold. The Makyo Star, my home. It's warm glow revives me and fills me with incredible strength and after twelve thousand years, its made its way to Earth. Can you feel it? Now that the Makyo star has finally arrived, I will become ten times more powerful than I've ever been before. There's nothing you can do to stop me from taking this planet for my own. Spice: The last time we fought, you got lucky kid. But now, you're about to find out how powerful we really are. Vinegar: Yeah, so be afraid. Be very afraid. Piccolo: (Garlic Junior appears from behind Piccolo) You!? Garlic Junior: Peekaboo! Come ta big daddy Garlic! Vinegar: (about Krillin's beaten body) Hey! Found a meatball! Heh heh. (stomping on Krillin with his leg) You're dead bonehead! Gohan: (after seeing Krillin falling, Gohan releases two huge blasts at Spice and Vinegar) Yahhhhhhhhhh!!!! Spice: No way! Vinegar: Darn! Yes way! Oh no! (Spice and Vinegar explode to death) Garlic Junior: Congratulations. You've made the first cut. It's too bad but your friend Piccolo wasn't as fortunate as you. Gohan: Grr... Garlic Junior: Heh. It's a shame, isn't it kid? Tough luck. Gohan: Grr... Garlic Junior: Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. You're mad, aren't you? What are you going to do about it? Piccolo: (to Garlic Junior) Your power's increased and you're big, but you're slow. You can't sacrifice speed for power. Not against me! Guardian: (to Kami) I can see you're tired. Wouldn't you like to put your feet up and rest...for eternity? Garlic Junior: (after Gohan rips through his stomach head-first in midair) Thanks a lot! I needed to lose a couple of pounds. Ha ha ha ha! Garlic Junior: (as Piccolo fades) Like they say, an old Namekian never dies! He just fades away! Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Garlic Junior: (while crushing Piccolo and Krillin by their heads at the same time) Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Two heads are always better than one! Maron: (after waking up and smacking Yajirobe) How dare you!? You tried to bite me! Yajirobe: I didn't bite you! You rolled over and stuck your foot in my mouth! Maron: Whatever. Yajirobe: Huh? Maron: I guess you're not used to having someone else's foot in your mouth huh? Garlic Junior: That little pimple of a shield is going to pop and the three of you are going to ooze into the dead zone like the pus that you are! Mister Popo: (about the Guardians) They've never done this before. It's a great honor Kami, to be pardoned for coming here. They've forgiven you. Kami: Oh yeah? Well, I haven't forgiven them! Get a life you stubborn old fools! Gohan: Oh my gosh, I can't believe you made it. Kami: Yes. By a whisker. Mister Popo: But my plants got sucked into the dead zone. Gohan: You made it, thank goodness! Krillin: Yeah, thank goodness you saved us Gohan. Piccolo: Hey, knock off the mushy stuff you sissies. Gohan: Uh, oh my gosh. Piccolo. Krillin: Hah ha! Check him out. Gohan: Wow. Piccolo! Piccolo: Yeah, well thanks for blowin' up the Makyo Star kid. Because o' you, Garlic shriveled up like a raisin. Gohan: Piccolo! We did it ourselves! We didn't even need my dad this time! Piccolo: We needed your dad very much kid. And he was here the whole time. Gohan: What? Are you sure? Piccolo: Of course I'm sure. He was here, inside of you, Gohan. Gohan: Heh...hey Piccolo? Piccolo: Yes. Gohan: Gosh. You're such an incredible friend. Piccolo: You too Gohan. You too. Oolong: (about Krillin and Maron) Man, this is just like beauty and the geek! Master Roshi: (about Master Roshi allowing the marriage to go through) Out of the question. You know you have to clear that with me first. Krillin:  Aw, come on. Master Roshi: We'll see. It's possible. As long as I get to kiss the bride first. Master Roshi: (while both he and Ox-King are staring at Maron laying in the sun in her bikini) Gosh. Whoah-ho! It's a beautiful morning, isn't it, Ox-King? Ox-King: Sure is, yes! The beach, the waves. Whoah. Chi-Chi: Fruitcakes! You should be ashamed o' yourselves! Maron: Aha ha ha! You middle-aged ladies crack me up! Bulma: What? Middle- Chi-Chi: Aged ladies? Bulma: (same time as Chi-Chi) Well, she's a lot older than I am, I'm not middle-aged, she is! Chi-Chi: (same time as Bulma) Well, she's a lot older than I am, I'm not middle-aged, she is! Bulma: You have some nerve! Chi-Chi: You're older than me and you know it! Bulma: But I've always been the prettiest one, and you know that! Chi-Chi: You think skimpy clothes make you prettier! Well, think again you bimbo! Grrr... Bulma: Grrr... Bulma: Where's Maron? Krillin: Well, things were gettin' complicated so I broke up with her. Master Roshi: Oh, poor guy. Ox-King: Ah, it's a darn shame. Oolong: Well, I don't believe it. I'll bet she dumped him. Master Roshi: You know, I bet I could teach Krillin a thing or two about getting along with the ladies. Turtle: Getting them mad you mean... Bulma: I had a weird dream last night that Vegeta came back. Yamcha: What? Vegeta? You dreamt about him? Bulma: You know, actually, he was pretty nice to me in the dream. And a good kisser to boot. Yamcha: What? You kissed him? Bulma: It was just a dream Yamcha! Oolong: You poor sap. You're jealous, aren't you? Admit it. Vegeta: I was hoping that Kakarot might have finally returned. Yamcha: Huh? What? No way. You never found him in space? Vegeta: Don't remind me. I'm angry enough to hurt somebody and pounding you might just be the therapy I need. Vegeta: These garments that you left...are they for a man or a woman? They're pink. Bulma: Come on, it's the style here. Vegeta: Men in pink...how bizarre. Bulma: Heh. (everyone laughs) Vegeta: This is ridiculous. I'm a warrior. Not a...a...a variety of flower. Bulma: Well, you smell good. (everyone laughs) Vegeta: Stop that. Stop it or I'll blast you all! Frieza: There it is. Planet Earth. Dead ahead. It's only fitting that the Saiyan should call such a puny planet home. King Cold: Lets finish this now son. We can destroy the planet from here. Frieza: Father, that would spoil all of my fun. I plan to savor my revenge, every little bit. King Cold: Well, well. Look. A ship on radar. Seems your Saiyan friend is almost home. Frieza: Heh heh heh heh. And when he gets there, he will find everything he has ever known or loved in ruins. Yes. He will know the wrath of Frieza! King Cold: Ahhh yes. I've always so enjoyed the last few quiet moments before laying a planet to waste, but I must say, I'm feeling almost as anxious as you to reach our destination Frieza. I'm quite curious to meet this Saiyan, after all, I've heard so much about him, one could hardly blame me. Frieza: (with his cybernetic attachments electrifying) Grr... King Cold: Seems something's got your blood boiling, yes son? Uh uh, we mustn't let our tempers get the best of us. Frieza: You've got me figured all wrong father. I was just admiring the view. It's simply electrifying, I'd say. Heh heh heh heh. Puar: (Bulma and Puar land) Yamcha!!! Yamcha: What in the world are you two doing here? Bulma: We came to see Frieza. I missed him on Namek, and I am not going to let that happen again. Yamcha: Are you crazy? Do you realize what he'll do to you when he finds you here? Bulma: Yes, of course I do. He'll come down and blow up the planet, but I wanna see him before he does it. What's so wrong with that? Besides, I hear he's kinda cute. Vegeta: It's amazing how every time you open your mouth, you prove you're an idiot. Yamcha: Tien! Chiaotzu! Chiaotzu: Ah? Tien: (angrily) Vegeta! I didn't realize you were going to be here too! Vegeta: Is that okay? Tien: As a matter of fact, it isn't. I still haven't forgotten what happened the last time we met. You disgust me. How can you stomach him Yamcha. Vegeta: Ha. Loser. Tien: What!? Yamcha: Hey, cool it guys. This is no time to fight, okay? Vegeta: (to Tien and Yamcha) Be quiet. I'd rather Frieza's scouters didn't detect us because of your incessant jabbering. Besides, all this scary talk is upsetting the Namek. Yamcha: The Namek? Chiaotzu: Uh? Yamcha: Piccolo!? How long have you been standing there? Piccolo: Long enough to hear all of your senseless bickering. Frieza: I will make him suffer for what he did to me! I will make this whole planet suffer! King Cold: Yes, do be quick about it, I'd rather not stay too long on this pathetic little mudball, not that I don't just love it here, but I still don't see why we can't simply destroy the planet right now! Frieza: You can be absolutely naughty father. It's impressive. And here I've always wondered where I picked up my knack for it. King Cold: I take great pride in the fact that I have taught you all the necessary skills of life. Use them well. Frieza: Indeed I will. For it just so happens that I have also learned from you the fine art of revenge. Allow me to demonstrate by vaporizing all of the Saiyan's friends one by one. Ha ha ha ha ha! Aha ha ha ha! My! Oh my! Ha! Won't he be surprised when he returns home and finds no one here to welcome him but me! Frieza: Well, you certainly are an arrogant little thing. And maybe in whatever little hole you just crawled out of, you're pretty tough. But you're no match for me, really. Fighting a pitiful little punk like you isn't even worth my time. King Cold: What a pleasant surprise. Frieza: You're right father. This may prove to be a bit more amusing than I had thought. Trunks: And now, you two are going down. King Cold: Aha ha. One thing is certain. If nothing else, I'd say this little creature is quite the comedian. Aha ha. Frieza: Hmmm. He is at that. I'll tell you what kid. Let me give you a piece of advice. He who acquires his skills quickly, is he who is the first to perish. Trunks: Heh. Thanks for the tip. Frieza: Huh? Why you! Trunks: Listen up! Now I've got one for you Frieza! Know your enemy! You've already made some pretty big assumptions about me, and that's a mistake that's going to cost you dearly! Frieza: You insolent brat! You should really learn to control your tongue! King Cold: Just destroy him already. We haven't got all day! Frieza: Really father! Have some patience! I'm just trying to have a little fun, if you don't mind! Trunks: He's right though. You really don't have all day! More like five minutes! Frieza: Oh, that's too bad! Heh heh heh heh. And here I made dinner plans! Trunks: So I've heard. Well, sorry Frieza. But I'm canceling your date with Goku. Frieza: Huh? King Cold: What's a Goku? Frieza: Father, I know you're bored, but please try to keep up. King Cold: Hmm... Frieza: So I take it you know that worthless Saiyan? Trunks: By reputation. But we'll meet soon. Frieza: Oh...don't be so certain. Heh. Trunks: But I couldn't be more certain Frieza. Frieza: Ooo... Trunks: Anytime now, Goku will be coming home. And only one of us is going to be here waiting for him. Get it? Frieza: Definitely. As it so happens, I was just about to suggest that very thing myself. It's so nice that you and I can finally agree on something, don't you think? Trunks: Heh heh heh. For once you're right. Frieza: Well, then I guess all that's left is for me to decide just how I'm going to annihilate you. Trunks: Enough kidding around! Frieza: Huh? Trunks: It's time you understood who I really am! So I'll tell you what. I'm going to let the two of you in on a little secret. You're about to find out what it's like to fight a real Super Saiyan, and I'm not talking about Goku. Frieza: What? King Cold: Grr... Trunks: Heh heh. Frieza: Heh heh heh heh. Ya crack me up kid. Ha ha ha! Aha ha ha ha ha ha! I've never met anyone who laid it on quite as thick as you! Aha ha ha ha...huh? (Trunks begins to power up) King Cold: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha...huh? Frieza: No! It can't be! King Cold: What is he? Trunks: Ahhhhhhhh!!!!! Bulma: Hey, maybe it would help us relax a little if we all sing a song. Vegeta: Shut up! You haven't had one useful thing to say since you got here. Now you stay in the back and keep quiet woman! I don't have time for your stupidity right now. King Cold: (after Frieza blasts at Trunks) My, I would say that was all rather anticlimactic, wouldn't you? I mean, the little runt certainly didn't last very long, now did he? Frieza: Well, what did you expect? He was only a...a...a... (the smoke clears) monkey? King Cold: Well done, Frieza. It only took you four tries to destroy that little boy. Aha ha ha ha ha! Frieza: I was just warming up father! That's all. Really! King Cold: Oho ho ho! Of course son. Of course. Heh heh heh heh. King Cold: Super Saiyan? I'm impressed. To encounter a fighter of your caliber is a rare occurrence indeed. But it does present quite an opportunity. You see, I could appreciate a great talent such as yours. My eyes are not blinded by pride like my son's were. Join me and take Frieza's place at my side as the supreme ruler of the universe. Trunks: Not a chance. King Cold: Now don't be too hasty. Imagine. This and every other world would be but the merest of baubles in your collection. Playthings for your amusement. Subject to your every whim. No? Alright. But grant me this. Allow me to examine your sword. A weapon of such obvious quality practically begs to be admired. Aha ha ha ha ha. You have nothing to fear from me. Trunks: So, you wanna see my sword huh? Here, catch. (Trunks tosses his sword to King Cold) King Cold: Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Yes. Yes indeed. Remarkable craftsmanship. And I have a hunch that you would not have defeated my son were it not for this sword. What do you say? Trunks: Believe what you want to. King Cold: Ha! Heh! Alright then! I will! I say, that without this sword, you're nothing! That's what I believe! Rahh!!! (King Cold lunges at Trunks with the sword and Trunks grabs it) Huh!? Uh!? Trunks: So much for your theory. King Cold: Yah! Trunks: You should know that a weapon doesn't make the man! (Trunks holds his arm in front of King Cold's chest) King Cold: Wait you dirty little Saiyan! (Trunks blasts King Cold, shredding through him, and sending him into a mountain) Ahhhhh!!! Krillin: First Frieza...now him! Oh man! Vegeta: (to himself) Who is this kid? King Cold: (King Cold is laying on the ground and Trunks is holding out his hand ready to blast) Wait. You can't. No. Please. I'm defenseless. Please. I'm not bad. My son was evil, but not I. I wanted nothing but peace. I meant you no harm, I swear it. (Trunks blasts King Cold to death) I'm...I'm telling the truth, noooo!!! Bulma: Oh, hey, you've got our logo on your jacket. That's my dad's company. Are you one of our employees? Trunks: No, not exactly. Just a fan. Bulma: Oh I see. Well, tell me your name and I'll recommend you to dad. Trunks: I uh...can't do that. I'm sorry, I know it's strange. Bulma: Ohhh...mystery man! Tien: Is his shoe size a secret too? Yamcha: Yeah! Why can't I have a secret name!? That's not fair! I bet you have a secret spy decoder ring too! Vegeta: (noticing Trunks staring at him while he's wearing the pink shirt Bulma gave him) What are you looking at? Trunks: Oh uh, nothing, it's just that I uh...like your shirt. Vegeta: You would... Vegeta: (noticing Trunks is staring at him again while he's wearing the pink shirt Bulma gave him) Why do you keep looking over here? Haven't you ever seen a pink shirt before? If you like it that much, you can have it. Trunks: No, no thank you. Vegeta: Then knock it off kid! Krillin: (Goku arrives in a space pod) Boom! What a landing! I hope he has some air bags in that baby! Yamcha: Why? To protect the ship from Goku's head? Trunks: (after testing Goku by lunging at him with his sword, and Goku blocking with his finger) Man, those same moves turned Frieza into cold cuts. Goku: Yeah, well. Your heart just wasn't in it this time. Bulma: (about Trunks and Goku talking) Man, for two guys who don't know each other, they sure do have a lot to talk about. Krillin: But hey, talking's not bad. It's a lot better than fighting. Gohan: Uh...at least he doesn't have his sword out anymore. Krillin: Yeah, and your dad put his finger away too. Goku: Oh man, gosh. You defeated Frieza in a flash, and yet, from what you're saying, these androids are even stronger than you. Trunks: They are. For sure. Hunting me down is one of their favorite hobbies, but it's two against one. There's not much I can do against them except run. Goku: Your mother knows me? Am I going to meet her, or do I already know her now? Trunks: Now... Goku: Oh wow! I know your mom huh!? That's bizarre! Does she live by me or something? Trunks: She's standing right there. Goku: Aha ha ha ha ha ha! Bulma's your mother!? Aha! ha! (Goku rolls on the ground from laughter) Krillin: Hey, Goku! So what did that guy say? Goku: Oh, umm...ummm...well, nothing important, really. Piccolo: That's funny. It all sounded pretty important to me. Goku: Really? You heard it all? Piccolo: My ears do more than just frame my face you know, Goku. Vegeta: But there's still a few things I'd like to know. For starters, where in the world did you get that absurd looking outfit? Goku: It's the latest fashion on planet Yardrat, but I guess it does look a little strange. (sees Vegeta wearing pink) But at least it's not pink! Vegeta: Grr...nevermind! Who cares about your stupid clothes anyway! Vegeta: Now hold on. I don't remember putting you in charge of this operation. Piccolo: Are you challenging me Vegeta? Vegeta: Heh, heh heh! Goku: Heh heh! Whoah now... Piccolo: Don't cross me Vegeta! Vegeta: Or what? Krillin: Yeah Bulma, your idea was good in theory, but maybe you oughta rethink your position on this one. Bulma: What are you saying!? Krillin: Ahem. (whispering to Bulma) Come here. Bulma: Huh? Krillin: (whispering to Bulma) What I'm trying to say is...I wanna try and stay on the good side of Vegeta and Piccolo. Bulma: Huh? Krillin: (whispering to Bulma) I don't know if you've noticed but they, uh...seem to have a hard time controlling their tempers. Bulma: Oh. Krillin: Hmm... Gohan: I get it. You're saying you don't wanna get beaten up. Krillin: Gohan, cool it! You're crampin' ma style! Goku: Then it's settled! We'll all fight together! (everyone yells yeah) Bulma: Look at you, the great general! Rallying his troops, hardly! You look more like a cheerleader. Goku: Uh... Bulma: It's hopeless. Boys will always be boys. Chi-Chi: Absolutely not! No way! And that is final! Goku: But are you trying to tell me that Gohan's studies are more important than saving the Earth? Chi-Chi: That's right mister! There's nothing more important than Gohan's studies right now! If Gohan takes three years off, he'll fall behind! Goku: Ah, relax, Chi-Chi. Yamcha: (to himself) Whatever Vegeta can take, I can take too. Three hundred times normal gravity shouldn't be that tough. I'm sure I can handle it. Dr. Brief: You know, I'm starting to think Vegeta's a few cards short of a full deck. Bulma: Huh? Dr. Brief: It wasn't enough to have the simulator create three hundred times gravity for him, now he's demanding that I make some more equipment for him to train with, then all he's going to do is break it. Bulma: Somehow, that doesn't surprise me at all. Mrs. Brief: Well, I think it's great he works so hard. Dr. Brief: Oh sure, he's training hard. But don't you think he's overdoing it a bit? Mrs. Brief: Oh no. I think it's very admirable. In my day, a man that showed that much dedication to anything was definitely husband material. A girl would have to be crazy to let him get away, I tell you. Bulma: Is he going to be alright daddy? Dr. Brief: I hope so. The only thing he hasn't bruised is his eyebrows. If he stays in bed for a week or so, he should be alright. He's dodged a bullet again. It's a miracle he survived such a horrible accident. Those Saiyans are practically indestructible. King Vegeta: (in a flashback) Vegeta, someday, you will be the strongest Saiyan in the universe. Vegeta: Father? King Vegeta: Those ships are headed to distant galaxies. From the day we are born, we Saiyans are examined for our power and leadership. The weakest of our people are sent to planets far away where they face no threat from our enemies. Vegeta: Hmph. Goodbye pests. King Vegeta: Vegeta, you come from a strong bloodline and you possess the potential power to join the super elite of all Saiyans. Never forget where you're from and train very hard my son, because if you've proven yourself worthy, perhaps someday you will become a Super Saiyan. Bulma: (from a viewing screen, as Vegeta is training under four hundred times gravity) Stop it Vegeta! You are in no condition to be doing this right now! Vegeta: Grr... Bulma: I know you don't want to believe it, but you are made of flesh and blood. Vegeta: Stop pestering me woman! Leave me alone! Bulma: You know I'm right! So why don't you just keep quiet and do as I say!? Vegeta: Grr... Bulma: Nothing to say? Well that's good. Now go back to bed and get some rest. Vegeta: Not yet. I do have something to say. Bulma: Huh? Uh, is something wrong? Or maybe you're finally going to apologize to me! If that's the case, then lets hear it! Vegeta: Leave me alone! Chi-Chi: Grr...hold it right there! Now, let me get this straight! You expect me to get dinner ready and wash your clothes while you and Gohan relax in a nice hot bath! Well, that's not gonna happen mister! Do you even care what kind of day I've had! I dunno what I liked better, being chased halfway home by a wild boar, or walking the rest o' the way on my tired aching feet! And it's all because we don't have a car! Goku: Uh, Chi-Chi, I'd drive you if I could, but you know I don't have a driver's license yet. Chi-Chi: Well it's time you got one! I don't know why you have to be the only man this town who doesn't have a driver's license or a car! Goku: (to Piccolo) You can't drive can you? Piccolo: Leave me out of this! Chi-Chi: I want both of you to put your training on hold for now and go to the driving school tomorrow! I think it's about time the two of you learned something useful for a change. Piccolo: Say what!!!? Goku: Aw, Chi-Chi, do we have to? Chi-Chi: Listen, all I'm asking you two to do is get your driver's license, it's not like I'm asking you to save the world. Piccolo: Uh... Goku: Uh... Chi-Chi: And if you don't...you'll have to cook your own meals from now on! Understand? Goku: (sees Piccolo in jeans and shirt) Oh man, Piccolo! Where did you get those clothes? Piccolo: Your wife got them for me out of your closet. Goku: Oh, uh...sorry about that, Chi-Chi means well...listen, since we're here, lets get this over with. Piccolo: Sounds good to me. Of course, I'm still not sure how I got suckered into this in the first place, she's not even my wife! Goku: Give me another chance! Instructor: Why should I, you stink! Goku: I can't smell anything. Are you sure? Instructor: I don't mean you! Your driving! Instructor: (Goku is driving very fast) Ahhh! Ahh! Step on the brake! Goku: The brake? Now, which one was that...? (Goku steps on the gas, increasing the speed even more) Instructor: Both hands are not on the steering wheel. Minus one point. Goku: You're testing me now? Instructor: Your eyes are off the road. That's one more point. Goku: No fair! (Goku steps on the break) Instructor: Ah! Hey, what's the big idea? You almost knocked my false teeth out! That's ten points! So there! Krillin: (Bulma is holding baby Trunks) Heh, I hope you don't think I'm nuts for asking, but what's the deal with the baby Bulma? Gohan: Is it your son Yamcha? I'll bet he is. Yamcha: Heh. He's not my kid. Krillin: Huh? Yamcha: Well, if you think that's a shock, just wait. Wait until she tells you who the father really is. Krillin: Huh? Gohan: Uh? Goku: Ha ha ha. I'll bet it's Vegeta, isn't it? (tapping baby Trunks) Right Trunks? Krillin: Uhh? Gohan: Ehh? Bulma: Now who told you that Goku? I wanted to keep it a secret. I was going to surprise you guys. Goku: (laughing from panic) Aha ha ha ha ha ha...well, actually...I just thought I'd take a guess. I mean, he kind o' looks like Vegeta. Aha ha ha ha ha ha... Bulma: You guessed his name too. Goku: Yeah...what are the chances of that, huh? Maybe I'm psychic. Yajirobe: I'm outta here. Goku: Hey, are you sure you don't wanna stay and help us out? Yajirobe: If you guys wanna stay here and get yourselves killed, that's your own business. But I'm takin' off while I still can. Guy: Dude! You were flyin'! Krillin: Nope, no androids...hey buddy! You seen any strange looking characters around here lately? Guy: Yeah man! Krillin: Huh? Guy: You flyin' dude! Dr. Gero: I am detecting a human with extraordinary power. What do your sensors indicate 19? Android 19: It is close. Coming closer. Perhaps the one we seek. Dr. Gero: Perhaps. This one far surpasses the average human. Android 19: We will destroy it, yes 20? Android 19: This is not the human we seek. I will identify it. (Android 19 scans Yamcha from afar) Human is designated male. Warrior subclass B. Identified as Yamcha. Dr. Gero: Excellent. He will provide us with ample energy. Goku: There's way too many innocent people around here. We've got to lead these two out of the city. Dr. Gero: Yes. Goku: Huh? Dr. Gero: It is too crowded here. I agree. Many people could get in our way. I will see to it that they do not. (Dr. Gero uses his eye lasers to blast the entire city, killing all the inhabitants) Goku: You monster! Dr. Gero: I cleared the area of innocents, in accordance with your wishes. Do you disagree with my methods? Goku: Grr...leave these people out of this! Android 19: There are no people left to leave out. Yajirobe: Ha. Yamcha's dumber than he looks! Bulma: Huh? You mean, you're not going to go with them? Yajirobe: Not on your life babe! Bulma: And why not? From what I hear Yajirobe, you're a pretty good fighter and they need all the help they can get. So I suggest you quit being a coward and get yourself into gear. Yajirobe: Can't do it. Bulma: I am tired of hearing your lame excuses! Get down there and help out your buddies now! Yajirobe: I don't know how to fly Bulma. Dr. Gero: (after Goku asks him how Dr. Gero knew their names) Yes, of course...as you wish. Though I doubt it will matter much to you after a few moments, when you have been ground to a pulp. But if this is the last thing you wish to hear before you die, I will tell you. Goku: (after changing to a Super Saiyan) Piccolo and Tien, you stay out of this. It looks like they only want me, and that's exactly who they'll get! Dr. Gero: This is a most unexpected development indeed. Android 19: This technique is not listed in my files, 20. Dr. Gero: Nor in mine. But my sensors indicate that there is no cause for concern. Yes, it is a most impressive ability. But it is nothing we cannot handle. 19 will demonstrate this by himself. Maron: Where's Krillin? Master Roshi: Oh, uh...he left a while ago. They're off trying to save the world from...annihilation again. You know how it is. Oolong: Maron, he's not lost! Krillin's off fighting some androids made by the leader of the old Red Ribbon army. Maron: What? Red ribbon? Oh, my goodness. Krillin, you sensed I was coming so you went out to get a red ribbon for me. Master Roshi: (to Maron) We're usually right there with those guys. Darn shame. We feel left out. Maron: But I want my Krillin now! Master Roshi: Okay, okay! He'll be back soon, I promise! It won't be long now! But allow me to keep you company in the meantime. Maron: Will you tell me the story about the red ribbons again? Master Roshi: Well, that's not exactly what I had in mind... Dr. Gero: Hm...Goku's new abilities greatly exceed anything I had anticipated. If the opportunity does not soon arise for 19 to steal some energy, he will drain his power reservoir and begin to malfunction. Piccolo: Goku's just not his usual confident self. His attacks aren't even hurting the android. He's going to need our help you guys. Tien: Hey, wait a sec. He seems fine. You're being paranoid. I mean look at him. What could go wrong? Piccolo: I tell you, something's not right. Goku's maxed out for some reason. He's going to give out if this keeps up. Vegeta: (after kicking Android 19 in the face) Nobody kills Kakarot while I'm around! Destiny has reserved that pleasure for me! Bulma: Vegeta wouldn't let anything happen to his little boy. We'll be just fine. Yajirobe: No we won't. We'll be...dead! Krillin: (to himself, about his friends) These guys are iron-clad! It's hard to keep pace with them sometimes. I'm only human. I wanna live. Android 19: Heh heh. Vegeta: I was watching your battle with Kakarot...so I've seen your energy absorbing technique. Oh well, if I can't blast you away, I'll have to pound you into a pulp, that's all. Android 19: You know some of my moves. But I know all of your moves Vegeta. Oh yes, Dr. Gero studied you very thoroughly. Vegeta: Oh, is that a fact? Then why were you so surprised when Kakarot turned into a Super Saiyan? I'll tell you why. Because your database doesn't cover the battles we had in space. Your bonehead creator picked a fine chapter to omit from your memory banks. Android 19: Oh? Vegeta: That's right my friend, let me ask you...does a machine like yourself ever experience fear? Vegeta: The sleeper has awakened. I am the prince of all Saiyans once again. Dr. Gero: Enough of this nonsense, fool! You may have become a Super Saiyan but your newfound powers are still no match for us. Please demonstrate 19. Vegeta: (after being punched continuously by Android 19) Just as I thought, you're nothing. Android 19: Huh? Vegeta: Silly robot. Do you really think you have a chance against a Super Saiyan like me? Your brain must be malfunctioning. Fresh out of the factory with no warranty and already broken. What a pity. Vegeta: (to Android 19, after slamming him in the face) I think you have an oil leak. What a bad deal. Such a fragile unit. Vegeta: What's the matter? You're the one who started this game! And now you don't want to play anymore? You were enjoying yourself before...when you were sucking the life out of Kakarot. Android 19: (fearful) Ah...ah...ah... Vegeta: So I guess it's true after all, androids do experience fear! Dr. Gero: (to Vegeta, as Android 19 tries to run away) Enough! Vegeta: Don't be absurd! It's enough because you're losing! You've come here to destroy us! Dr. Gero: Uh...ah...ah...ah... Vegeta: Fool! You're going to have to finish what you started! Time has run out for you android! (Vegeta takes to the sky and charges a huge blast) Piccolo: Ah? Tien: Uh? Krillin: Man, what power! Vegeta: Here it comes! A little going away present for you! Aha ha ha ha ha! Ahhhh! (Android 19 is struck by the blast from behind) Android 19: Ah...ah...ah...ah!!! (Android 19's head rolls on the ground) Vegeta: I only wish there was a junkyard nearby so we could give 'im a proper burial! Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh! Dr. Gero: You are a bit stronger than I anticipated. But it is nothing I cannot handle. Your defeat is imminent. Vegeta: Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Yes, your friend managed to steal quite a bit of energy from me before I stopped him. Now's your chance to beat me. A vicious attack now could be sufficient. Dr. Gero: (to himself, about Vegeta) How can he be so confident? What is he hiding? Yes, he is shrewd. He seems completely at ease, but is he? Vegeta: Let me ask you this. What makes you think that you're going to do any better than him? You're an android too. I bet your head rolls just as well as his does! Dr. Gero: (while draining Piccolo's energy) Ah yes. This is invigorating. We should have done this sooner! Piccolo: Stay out of this one Vegeta. I owe him. He's mine. If he manages to get by me, then he's all yours. How does that grab you? Vegeta: I don't care if you want to fight him. I don't even care if you get yourself killed. But I do care if he manages to steal more of your energy and makes himself even stronger, so just keep that in mind while you're having your little fun, got it? Piccolo: Yeah, I got it. I'll make sure that doesn't happen again. Dr. Gero: (to himself) Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Well, I will make sure that it does happen. Piccolo: (to Dr. Gero, while grabbing Dr. Gero's hand) You know, I used to be like you. One day you'll learn...that the more you hurt others, the harder your life becomes. It's simple. Your desire to kill is killing you! (Piccolo chops off Dr. Gero's hand with one swift blow) It's a darn shame! You could've put this hand to good use! What a waste of technology! Dr. Gero: I do not understand! My data indicates that their abilities could not have improved this much! Piccolo: Your data probably would've been accurate if we hadn't been warned about your arrival three years before you got here. In other words, we knew you were coming so we got all of our ducks in a row! Dr. Gero: Ducks? That makes no sense! What do you mean!? Piccolo: I mean that we've been preparing for you my friend! Vegeta: (about killing Dr. Gero) How about the coup de grce Piccolo? Or do I have to step in and handle it? Piccolo: No! This is my job! I know if the tables were turned, this guy wouldn't hesitate. Believe me, no problem. Yajirobe: If you go down any further...I...I'll...I'll throw Trunks out the window! Bulma: Oh, really? I don't think Vegeta would like you talking about his son like that! Trunks: Hey! Why didn't you try to save them Vegeta? Vegeta: Who? Trunks: Who? Bulma and her son! Vegeta: Oh! Them! I have more important things to worry about than that foolish woman and her blasted child! Now out of my way! Bulma: Ahh! How dare you Vegeta! Uh! Every time you stick your geeky little face in front of Trunks, you make him cry! Grr... Krillin: Hee hee hee hee hee hee hee hee... Bulma: It's alright. Your daddy's not going to scare you with that ugly mug of his. Vegeta: Bulma, will you forget about the child for one minute! Vegeta: Nobody saw him fly away, did they? Gohan: Uh...so what are you saying? Vegeta: I'm saying that android is trying to escape on foot, which means he probably hasn't gotten very far. Piccolo: If that's the case, then we might just have a chance to find this lab and destroy the other two androids before Gero even gets there. Vegeta: Hmph. I would never do anything that cowardly! Trunks: Huh? Vegeta: Only one course of action can possibly satisfy me! I will fight these androids face to face, and I'll break them with my bare hands! Bulma: (to baby Trunks) Well Trunks, at least we know you'll grow up to be a handsome young man. And think, all this time, I was worried that you'd look like your dad. Gohan: From what I've seen, I'd say the grown up Trunks is pretty cool. Bulma: You're right. He is cool, isn't he? Yajirobe: Hmph. Not that cool. Bulma: What did you say!? How dare you say something like that about my son? Yajirobe: Gee whiz Bulma, do you think you could freak out any more!? Bulma: What!? (holding baby Trunks) Well, we'll just tell daddy about him! Yajirobe: No don't! Not Vegeta! Please, I take it back! Gohan: Ha ha. Watch out Yajirobe. Little Trunks is goin' ta be pretty tough himself one o' these days. He may come after you if he hears you were givin' his mom a hard time. Yajirobe: Yeah, I'd like ta see him try! Bulma: Ooo! That does it! I'm going to tell Vegeta exactly how mean you're being to his son! Yajirobe: No, you can't tell! I'll do anything! Krillin: Oh man! It's freezing up here! Tien: I know. But this is no time to complain. Piccolo: Just one more reason I'm glad I'm not an Earthling. Dr. Gero: (after pounding Krillin to the ground) Heh heh heh. Silly human. What exactly did you think would happen when you found me? Krillin: Why don't I show you. Dr. Gero: Little fool. You still do not understand! Android 18: I see that you have chosen to become an android... Dr. Gero: Yes. Now I have eternal life like you. But we have pressing matters at hand. In the past, the two of you have displayed an unacceptable tendency to disobey my orders. I blame myself for this and the way I programmed you. I have since modified your programming however and I will no longer tolerate insubordination. Dr. Gero: Well, Goku's friends are very determined to stop us, but they will not! We will destroy them just as they destroyed Android 19! Android 17: Android 19? So you built him after all. Dr. Gero: Yes. Android 17: I see. But he was of a different design than 18 or myself. He was an energy absorbing model, was he not? Dr. Gero: Yes he was. Android 18: How very interesting. Dr. Gero: Huh? Android 18: And you've chosen that same design for yourself? You thought that an energy absorbing model like 19 would be easier to control? Dr. Gero: Yes. Android 18: And now he's been destroyed... Dr. Gero: Grrr... Android 17: (after scanning the inactive Android 16) According to this data, I am much stronger than this model is. Dr. Gero: It makes no difference. Android 17: Hmm...18, go ahead and activate him, now. Dr. Gero: I am your creator! You will do as I tell you to do! Stop meddling with Android 16 now! Or I will force you to stop! Android 17: Your controller is broken. Dr. Gero: Then I will make another. Android 18: Heh... (Android 18 opens Android 16's capsule release valve) Dr. Gero: For the last time, do not release him! (Android 17 slams his arm through Dr. Gero's back and out from his front) Ah...oh...ah...oh... Tien: Huh? Krillin: Uh? Piccolo: Uh... Vegeta: Augh... Trunks: Grr... Dr. Gero: What have you done? How dare you? Don't you know...I gave you life...and I can take it away! (Android 17 kicks Dr. Gero's head off and the decapitated head bounces and rolls on the ground) Grr...that does it! Now I am mad! (Android 17 crushes what remained of Dr. Gero's head) Android 17: Heh heh heh heh heh... Krillin: Did you see that? He squashed 'im like a bug! (Android 17 moves his finger, calling for Krillin) Android 17: Ahem. Krillin: Vegeta, I think he wants to talk to you. Android 17: You with the shiny head, come here. Krillin: You talkin' ta me? Android 17: Uhuh. Krillin: Yahhh! No way! Not me! Android 17: Heh heh heh heh. Vegeta: Don't be a coward. Go on. Fight him. Krillin: All by myself? Come on guys, we're in this together. I'd like to keep my head on my shoulders. Tien: Don't worry about it. I've got you covered Krillin. Krillin: (Krillin steps forward with fear and Android 17 steps up) Uh!? Android 17: Heh heh heh heh... (Android 17 walks away and Krillin sighs with relief) Vegeta: It looks like he took pity on you, loser. That's too bad. You're so pathetic! Now he knows you're scared! Next time, he won't show you any mercy at all! Krillin: What? Android 17: Tell me, are all of you Saiyans so full of yourselves? Is Goku like you? Is this the way you try to hide your incompetence. We Androids will always be superior to your kind. Vegeta: You take that back! You'll regret saying that! You're nothing but a machine made of tin! You're just a bunch of toys made by a crazy old man! And don't forget that tin toys can be broken! Android 18: 16, lets see what you can do. Destroy him. Android 16: I refuse. Vegeta: So, the big guy's not so dumb huh? Android 18: Ready, little man? Vegeta: So, it's ladies first, is it? That's fine with me! Now don't expect me to go easy on you! I fight to win! Vegeta: (to Android 18) Oo...for someone made of metal, you move pretty fast. Heh heh heh heh heh heh. If you give up now, I promise I'll turn you into something practical, like a toaster or a washing machine. Vegeta: (to Android 18) What's wrong? Batteries getting low? Vegeta: (to Android 18) Your warranty ran out with me a long time ago, so you're going to be recycled. Android 17: What do ya say 16, ya up for a fight? Android 16: No. I will not fight them. Android 17: You won't? Is something wrong with you man? So, you're just gonna stand there like a statue, is that it? Android 16: I told you. I will only fight with Goku. Android 17: Alright. Have it your way pal. But I suggest you loosen up before you rust. Vegeta: Heh heh heh heh. What's the matter? You look a bit ruffled. Android 18: Yes, well. Looks aren't everything. You fight quite well for being such a little man. It's impressive. Even if you are a Saiyan. Vegeta: I know. There are very few willing to train as intensely as I did to achieve this kind of power. Android 18: How sad. To work so hard for...so little. Vegeta: Sad for you! Krillin: (about Android 16) What's he doing over there? Why isn't he fighting with the others? He's just standing there like a some kind o' statue. (Android 16 looks at Krillin) Android 16: Hmmm... Krillin: Yahhhh!!!! Huh? Android 17: (after Android 17 and Android 18 pummel Trunks and Vegeta to the ground) How curious. Android 18: Huh? Android 17: Vegeta's hair has changed color again. Android 18: Yes. And that strange glow has faded too. It's the same with this young boy (Trunks). I don't have any files on him. Android 17: Neither do I. Android 18: I wonder who he is. Android 17: Hmph. It doesn't really matter, does it? Whoever he is, he's no threat to us. Android 17: (to Krillin) You look scared. Just...relax. You are not the one we're looking for, okay? We want Goku. This one seems to be at a loss for words. Goodbye then. Come on, lets go. Lets go find Goku. Android 18: And just why didn't you ask him where Goku is? Android 17: Don't be ridiculous. Sure we could force him to tell us easily enough. But then we wouldn't get to have the fun of finding Goku ourselves. Android 18: I see. Hmm...well, bye. Krillin: Those cold hearted machines! How can they be so calm!? Android 18: Really, I don't understand why you insist on behaving so foolishly 17. Android 17: What's so foolish about wanting to have a little fun? What are you looking at 16? Android 16: You two made too much noise. You scared the birds away. Android 17: Birds? Gohan: Ah, oh boy. There it is. Home at last. Wow. What a view! Bulma: Gohan, listen. Can we go by my house first. Gohan: Uh...uh...but I wanna go see my dad Bulma. He's not feeling well, remember? Bulma: I know, but I promise I won't take long, okay? It feels like we've been gone forever and I really need some more supplies. Pee-yoo! Little Trunks needs his diaper changed. Gohan: Uh... Bulma: Being a mother really isn't easy you know. I have to get baby Trunks some fresh diapers and then I have to feed him. It's a lot o' work. Yajirobe: Gohan! I vote that we all go to Bulma's house! I want some food! Baby Trunks: Waaa! Waaaaa! Gohan: Well, you guys win. It's three against one. Krillin: No, stop!!! Android 17: And, what do you want now? Krillin: Stop. You guys leave Goku alone. He's sick, he can't fight you now. Goku hasn't done anything to you. Why are you after him? Android 17: 16 has been programmed to destroy Goku. So that's what we're going to do. Krillin: Why? You don't have to do that! Android 17: We're only following Dr. Gero's master plan. Krillin: Just listen to yourselves! Did you forget? Dr. Gero is gone! You took care of that! Android 17: Yes, I haven't forgotten about that. But this, friend, is a game. Krillin: What do you mean? This is just a game? Is that all? Android 17: That's right. Yes. And finding Goku is a part of the game. That's why we did not ask you where he is. Krillin: No! Stop this! I beg of you, please don't go after Goku. Please! You don't have to do this! Android 16: No. I am programmed to destroy Goku. Android 17: There you go, pal. Now if you'll excuse us, we have work to do. Stop worrying about Goku and take care of your other friends. They look like they could use some senzu beans. (Android 18 walks up to Krillin) Krillin: Uh...ah...ah...ah (Android 18 kisses Krillin on the cheek) Uh... Android 18: Good luck. Bye. Piccolo: Ever since Vegeta became a Super Saiyan, his ego has been out of control. Honestly, I think what that android hurt the most today was his pride. He is very ashamed of his defeat. Tien: Trunks, you were able to take out Frieza singlehandedly. You're one of the strongest people I've ever met, but those androids tossed you aside as though you were nothing. Goku is strong, but in all honesty, I don't see how he can be that much stronger than Trunks or Vegeta. And if that's the case, we're done for. Krillin: I remember Master Roshi telling me something long ago. He said that if Kami and Piccolo hadn't split into two, they'd be the strongest being in the entire universe. Hello? Get it? The reason Piccolo has gone to Kami's place is so that he can join with him again. Tien: Uh...really? Krillin: If those two unite again into one being, they'll become the ultimate Namek warrior. And Piccolo is stronger than he's ever been before, so together they'll be an unstoppable force! Look. You know what a Super Saiyan is. Piccolo and Kami will become a Super Namek! Trunks: My father...uh...I mean Vegeta...we can't forget about him. Krillin: There's no reason for you to hide it anymore Trunks. We all know about Bulma and Vegeta and the fact that they had a baby. And that baby is you. Master Roshi: (after Maron leaves with lots of her boyfriends) What a darn shame. If only I were a younger man...then maybe I could've been one of Maron's boyfriends too. It's not fair! It's not! Kami: What an unexpected honor this is. I never thought that you and I would ever be united again. Piccolo: Stop smiling, I'm not doing this because I want to. It's because I need our combined powers, that's all. To be perfectly honest, I'm not sure how I'm going to tolerate being so close to you. Your mere presence sickens me. Kami: Perhaps my time as guardian of Earth has come to an end. Mister Popo: No Kami! You are still needed! The people of Earth still need you to watch over them! Kami: You are too kind, Mister Popo. But I must act for the good of the Earth. This is about the continuing struggle for power between the forces of good and evil...and the danger that looms over us now poses a greater threat than anything we have faced in the past...even Vegeta with all of his strength was no match for these androids. Super Saiyan or not, he was tossed aside like a ragdoll. These androids will be difficult to beat. Even if Goku recovers from his illness, he will provide little resistance against these powerful new foes. In our combined form, Piccolo may be the only one strong enough to win this fight. Piccolo: We agree. The force that threatens Earth is bigger than both of us. But at least when our powers are united, we still stand a chance. And no matter how slim that chance is, we must take it. Piccolo: Don't you remember what Trunks said? The future will be destroyed by these androids! Kami: Yes, but Trunks made a mistake. He told you that the androids you encountered today are not the same ones that he fought in the future. Piccolo: Heh heh heh heh heh heh. Yeah right. And these androids are a real great bunch o' guys once you get to know them. Android 17: (after hijacking a van) Right. We're all set. Now lets go find Goku. Android 18: Step on it. Come on. Lets go. Android 17: Quiet now, or I'll make you ride in the back. Android 17: (while being chased by a gang of bikers) Why don't you take a new outfit from one of these goons, 18? Android 18: No, there's nothing in my size. Android 17: Hmph. Picky. Master Roshi: That was delicious Chiaotzu! You really know how to make a fine bowl of soup! Chiaotzu: Heh heh heh heh. Thanks Master Roshi! Oolong: Mmmm...this might be the best soup I ever had. Please tell me there's some more where this came from, I could go for a couple o' helpings of seconds and maybe even some thirds too. Turtle: Uh...where did you learn to cook like that? Chiaotzu: I used to cook for Tien when he was training and I came up with a few of my own recipes. Master Roshi: Here's a thought. Why don't you stay here and train with us Chiaotzu. Chiaotzu: Huh? Stay with you? Master Roshi: Sure. You could stay here and train with all of us. Oolong: Train? Heh! Come on, admit it! The only reason you want him to stay is so he'll cook for ya! Master Roshi: That's ridiculous! I...I just thought it would be nice if he- Oolong: Nice if he cooked for you! Master Roshi: That's not true! Chi-Chi: Ahhhhh! (everyone is shocked at Chi-Chi screaming) Oh no! What in the world was I thinking!? We don't have a minute to waste! We've got to hurry! Before it's too late! Gohan: What are you talking about? (Chi-Chi takes out Gohan's study material) Chi-Chi: Well, lets hit those books Gohan. Gohan: Uh...I can't study now. Chi-Chi: Don't you dare talk back to me! Now go to it! Krillin: Wow Gohan! And I thought I had it rough! Vegeta: (to himself) No, the Super Saiyans of legend were an invincible warrior race! I am their son, and at long last, I have risen to claim my birthright. I have stepped into the ranks of greatness. All my life, I have worked towards this goal and for what...to be brushed aside as easily as a common housefly by an android? A true Super Saiyan would not have fallen. Maybe I'm not who I think I am. Perhaps there are still new plateaus for me to reach. Far greater heights to which I must ascend. Yes. I will ascend. The universe will marvel to see the ultimate Saiyan potential once again realized. And I will be legendary. And then Kakarot, then I will see you bow before your prince! Yamcha: It looks like we'll be at Master Roshi's island in no time. Oh and Krillin, don't you think we'd better tell Bulma what we're up to? Krillin: Good idea. Wait, are you saying that I should call her? No way! Yamcha: Come on Krillin. I'm flying the plane here. Thanks buddy. Krillin: Alright. (to Trunks) No offence man, your mom's just hard to deal with sometimes. Trunks: Heh heh heh. Believe me. I know what you mean. Bulma: Hi Trunks. I'm back. Did you miss me? Trunks: I guess so. Bulma: Well, tell me. What do you think of the younger version of your mother? Pretty cute, huh? Trunks: Well, I'd say you haven't really changed that much. Bulma: You mean then... I'll keep my girlish looks for at least another ten years? Oh, this is great! Ha ha ha. This is so embarrassing. Oolong: Hey, wait a minute. If those androids are going to Goku's house first and they don't find him there, isn't this the next obvious place to look? Yamcha: Yeah, probably. That seems logical enough. Oolong: Then what are we doing waiting around here like sitting ducks?! When they get here, we're finished! Android 18: I don't understand how 16 can be so calm right now. It's been hours since he opened his eyes let alone said anything. You'd think that he would be excited that we're on our way to Goku's house, but instead he just sits there like a rock. Android 17: Leave him alone 18. 16 is just focused on fighting Goku. Now relax. We'll be in the next town soon. You'll finally be able to find some new clothes there. Android 18: Uh. Excellent. I can't wait to get out of these old rags. You think you can drive a little faster? Android 17: Yeah. Bulma: Well, I guess that proves I'm a genius after all, eh boys? Imagine. Me...building a time machine in the future. Kami: For the last four years, I have felt a terrible disturbance taking shape on the Earth below. A great evil. But I'm afraid it wasn't the androids that I sensed. Piccolo: Huh!? Kami: There is another threat. A vile creature which I'm afraid will prove to be a hundred times more lethal and cunning than even the androids. Android 18: So this is the best outfit in your store? Store Owner: Yep. You won't find better than that little lady. Well, now how do you lak it? (country accent) Android 18: How do ya thank I lak it? (country accent) It's grotesque. But I guess I can't expect to find much better in a hick town like this. It'll just have to do. Krillin: (after Krillin talks to Bulma on the phone) It's Bulma. She wants us to watch somethin' on TV. Master Roshi: Why? She gonna be on a show? Oolong: Yeah, and now she wants us all to watch so she can brag about how famous she is... Yamcha: Ha ha ha ha. Probably. Piccolo: (to Kami) You old fool. You actually enjoy keeping me in suspense like this, don't you? Kami: Piccolo has changed. The evil that once filled his entire being has greatly diminished. And when we unite, I trust he will use our combined strength in the service of good. Piccolo: (after fusing with Kami) No longer am I Kami or Piccolo. I am the Namek who has long since forgotten his name. Cell: (after killing a victim by absorbing him through his tail) Now that we've gotten that vermin out of the way...you're next Piccolo. Piccolo: (to Cell) The Piccolo that you know is gone. I am the Namek. And as for you...well...you're history. Cell: I'm impressed Namek. Your power is astounding. I'm sure you will prove to be a most satisfying meal. Piccolo: Don't count on it. Piccolo: You know you made one critical mistake. You should've never emptied this city of its entire population! Cell: Why is that? Piccolo: Because as long as there are no innocent bystanders to get in the way, I'm free to fight you with the best of my ability. Cell: So what's stopping you? Piccolo: You know, that's a really good question. Android 16: It came from Gingertown. Android 17: Huh? Android 16: Two enormous powers are fighting there. Android 17: Hmm...you mean your sensors can detect power levels? Why didn't you tell us that before? Android 16: Because you did not ask. Android 18: What was that? Something wrong? Android 16: Something is happening to his power level. He seems to be losing energy. Android 18: You're talking about that fighter you said was as strong as 17? Android 16: I am. Android 17: It's like I said. What you're detecting is impossible. Your sensors are going to have to be recalibrated and that's all there is to it. No one is as strong as I am. Cell: My name is Cell. I am an android. Piccolo: You...you're an android? Cell: I am the single greatest achievement of my creator Dr. Gero. Piccolo: Ah, as I should've known. Cell: You see, the powers of Vegeta, Goku, Frieza, and so many others have already been incorporated into my being. But even these powers pale in comparison to the strength of the androids. It is this strength which I must possess for myself. Cell: The computer told me one more thing. Once I have absorbed the other androids, I will be the most powerful being who has ever lived. Piccolo: But what for? You were already the strongest creature alive in your time. Cell: This is true. But my design was meant to include the powers of Androids 17 and 18. Without them I can never be complete. I had to seek them out. It's what I was created to do. Of course, it may also be the blood of Vegeta and Frieza coursing through my veins which fuels my desire for more power. Piccolo: I will never allow you to be completed. You're going down Cell. I intend to put an end to your diabolical schemes once and for all. Cell: (to himself) Trunks is here. Stupid boy. As if being killed by me in his own time wasn't enough. I don't understand why creatures so defective are ever allowed to live. Oh well. It will soon be corrected. Vegeta: (to himself) It seems too incredible to imagine. With that union, Piccolo has become more powerful than I am, even as a Super Saiyan. But that's impossible! He's nothing more than a mere Namek! Krillin: (Tien arrives) Piccolo, eh...I mean...Kami! Eh...no...uh...I mean that is...uh...uh...whoever you are, I'm trying to say that Tien is here. Piccolo: Krillin, just call me Piccolo. Android 18: I hope you know how much I hate this outfit. I look like a cowgirl. Do you think we'll have the time to find me something better? Android 17: I suppose. Vegeta: (to himself) This cannot be happening. Every time I reach a new level of strength, a greater power appears to challenge my authority. It's as if fate is laughing at me with a big stupid grin, just like Kakarot. Vegeta: Big deal! Krillin: Huh? Vegeta: I say let him become complete. If Cell destroys the androids, he'll save me the trouble! And fighting one battle is much simpler than fighting four. I don't care how powerful he becomes. I'll still beat him! Vegeta: Now, if any of you would like to take on Cell or the androids while I'm away, be my guest. I'll be back to finish the job once you fail. (Vegeta leaves) Piccolo: (about Vegeta) Sometimes, he really gets on my nerves. Trunks: Well, it looks like the designs for Android 17. Krillin: Android 17? I don't mind telling you Trunks. That thing scares me. It's those eyes of his you know, there's something about them that's just...creepy. Krillin: Listen Trunks, I don't wanna be the bearer of bad news, but I don't think Vegeta will let ya train with him...he's very uh...independent. Bulma: Wow. It looks like these androids are made up of organic substances patterned after human cells. So that's how it's possible for Cell to merge with them at a cellular level. Krillin: Uh...what? Cell: Ha. It's Krillin. How did you know I was here? Krillin: I could smell you from a mile away. Krillin: (to himself, about Cell) I'd better watch my step. If I make one wrong move, he'll turn me inside out and hang me out to dry. Cell: A valiant effort Krillin. But all in vain. Tien: (Cell smashed Krillin's face through a plane) Krillin, are you alright? Krillin: What do you think? Goku: Vegeta knows it too. Through my dreams, I could hear him speaking what I had also felt. That there is a level beyond that of a Super Saiyan. And I will rise to claim it. Goku: Kamiccolo. Piccolo: Uh! Goku: What? Did I say something wrong? Piccolo: Listen, I've been through some changes. But my name is still Piccolo. And don't forget that. Android 18: (Android 18 is looking through a wardrobe) Uh. Whoever owns these clothes should have their optic sensors adjusted. They are obviously malfunctioning. Vegeta: I require nothing more than the essentials. This is not a vacation. This is work. Goku: Ignore him Mister Popo. He's a little uptight today. He's just eager to complete his training. Vegeta: Yes, so then I can take care of you. Heh heh heh heh heh heh. Android 17: Hi. Can Goku come out and play? Piccolo: (to himself) Oh, this is perfect. It's exactly what I wanted for breakfast. Piccolo: Goku's gone now. So why don't you go get lost. Android 17: Now, now. It's not very nice to talk to your guest that way, you know. Piccolo: I'm going to enjoy this. Android 17: Hmm. I don't think you know what you're getting yourself into by challenging me. Just give up. Really, you can't win. Android 17: He beat me. How? Just how could he beat me? I must've miscalculated somewhere. Piccolo: Stay down. Piccolo: (to Android 17) What's wrong? Do you need to recharge your batteries? Bulma: Why'd Dr. Gero have to make these androids so hard to figure out? Android 17: Are you ready to begin again? Piccolo: Yes, of course. Android 17: I have enjoyed this game. I'd love to stay but I must find Goku and deal with him. Piccolo: Then stop talkin' and start fighting! Android 17: It's a shame that you insist on getting in our way. Our mission has nothing to do with you. It's Goku that we're after. Terminating your life is not something that we wish to do. It doesn't make sense for you to die out here in the middle of nowhere when we have no interest in killing you. Why don't you just tell us where Goku is and then leave unharmed. It's the only logical thing to do. Piccolo: Well, soon you'll realize that the people on this planet aren't logical at all. Funny thing is, they've rubbed off on me. Android 17: Fine. I'll make you tell us where he is. Now, how's that sound? Bad move, but at least you're not boring. After all, I'd rather enjoy not adhering to logic. Android 17: You can't keep this up. You'll tire out. Piccolo: And you're not perfect. You'll make a mistake before that happens. Android 17: You're just a flesh and bone creation. Android 18: Men. Heh. They just have to destroy everything. Chi-Chi: Hey, telephone guys! Collect call. It's Bulma. Yamcha: Don't accept. Chi-Chi: Oh come on guys. It's urgent. She's figured out a way to disable the androids. Master Roshi: What!? Accept the charges! Krillin: (same time) Accept the charges! Tien: (same time) Accept the charges! Yamcha: (same time) Accept the charges! Bulma: I heard all that! Well I guess I'll still let you guys use the remote I invented that disables the androids circuits but only if mister loudmouth don't accept the charges Yamcha agrees to give yours truly a foot massage. Krillin: Gosh, I don't know Bulma. Bulma: Well, that's the deal so you can take it, or leave it. Yamcha: She knows that I can't stand rubbing her feet! Piccolo: Not bad for a machine. Especially an early prototype like yourself. Cell: What's wrong? You're frightened? Don't be ashamed. It's hard, I know. You feel my power and it's hard to bear. Hah ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Piccolo: What do you mean? It's not your power! You stole it by taking the lives of innocent people. Cell: What? Fool. Stole it? They're part of greatness now. I've given them all a purpose. Piccolo: You're nuts. Android 17: Hey, I was in the middle of something. You're intruding. Cell: Yes, I see that now. How rude of me. There must be some way I can make it up to you. Android 17: No need for long-winded apologies. Just go away. Android 17: (after Piccolo saves Android 17 from Cell) Thank you Piccolo. That was close. So what's the deal? You said this creature's here to kill us? Piccolo: His name is Cell. He was spawned by Dr. Gero's computer and he came here to absorb the two of you. If he succeeds, and he's able to integrate you and Android 18 into his being, his evolution will be complete. Android 18: What a creep. Cell: Rejoice my brother and sister. The three of us are like pieces to a puzzle, designed and destined to fit together and form one whole. Unite with me and fulfill Dr. Gero's dream to create the ultimate warrior. Android 17: It's a nice offer but no thanks. Besides, it seems a little crowded in there already. I don't need you. This is what I am. Cell: It doesn't matter what you think you are. You are part of me and I am going to absorb you. Cell: I am amused by your little one-man army but I have run out of patience. The road of life ends here for you. You've reached a dead end. Cell: Alone at last. It seems that Piccolo will no longer be joining us. Hmm...grr...don't be afraid Android 17. This is your destiny. It has always been. You are part of me. (looks at Android 18) Ah, you too my little peach. I'm going to gobble you up! Cell: 17, I never planned on humiliating you like this. It's a simple merger, that is all. Your resistance is the cause of your pain. Android 16: I will kill Cell. This world is a good place. Cell wishes to destroy it. I will not let that happen. Android 18: Come back. You'll be killed! Android 16: That does not matter. Life is good, but living in fear is not my idea of living. By the way, I enjoyed the time we spent together. You guys are...cool. Android 16: Cell, I recommend surrender. Cell: What, to a piece o' junk like you? Android 16: (after ripping off Cell's tail) That should put a stop to your absorbing capabilities. Now you are like a bee without a stinger. Android 16: I thought I had the solution but I did not. You are bound to have a weak point somewhere though. Cell: Really now? We'll see. Android 16: This time I'll rip off your head. Cell: Heh heh heh heh heh heh. You'll have to catch me first. Android 16: Why are you still here? I told you to leave this place! Android 18: Hey, you squashed the bug. What is there to be afraid of now? Android 16: That attack was not enough to finish Cell! It is imperative you run from this place! You too, 17! Goku: This isn't good. Cell's power just went up the roof! Gohan: Yeah. Goku: It's what we feared. Cell must've taken one of the androids. That's the only explanation! Android 18: Why don't you just go back to wherever you came from!? Cell: I'm on the verge of becoming a God! What do you think? Heh heh heh heh heh. I'll leave? My dear android, when will you understand that you belong to me? Android 16: Don't listen to him! That's not 17! Cell is using his voice to trick you! Cell: Be quiet you fool! You only have half a brain left! You have no idea what you're talking about! Cell: You fool! You've seen! You're no match for me! Tien: I might just be a pothole in the road to you big guy, but it's going to be one heck of a deep pothole! Cell: Curses. 18 has managed to escape my sight. All because of that insolent meddler. You puny man. Now you realize how pointless it is to try to stop the inevitable. (Cell kicks Tien) Cell: So you're Goku. Goku: And I take it you're Cell. Cell: Well, Goku, it's so nice to meet you. Goku: Yeah, I bet. So you can add another head over your mantle right? Cell: Here I've always wondered what it would be like to face the legendary Goku, and all you have to say is see you tomorrow? Heh heh heh heh. How disappointing. From all I've heard, I never would've pegged you as a coward. Bulma: Now you'll have to get within ten meters of the androids to be in range. Any farther away and it won't work. Krillin: Huh!? Uh...ten meters!? Gee don't you think that's kind o' close? Bulma: Don't complain. You're lucky you have that thing at all. Gohan: You had us all really worried about you Tien. But that was really cool how you stopped Cell from absorbing that other android. I don't know if I could've done that. Vegeta: I will take care of everything now. There is no need to attempt the training, Kakarot, because I'm sure you will not survive it. Besides, I guarantee that I won't be needing any of you to help me take care of the androids. Tien: You fool! Piccolo: Listen, I don't know how powerful you think you are, but you're underestimating our enemies. Vegeta: Heh heh heh heh heh heh. Tien: While you were in that room, Cell swallowed up Android 17 and transformed, so don't try to tell us you can handle it. You don't even know what you're up against. Android 18: (to Android 16) Oh, great. I think you're starting to malfunction. All you've been doing is staring at these birds all day long. What do you see in those things anyway? Don't you care that Cell's going to suck me up like he did 17? Don't you care that he's going to kill you? Bulma: Vegeta, you don't look that different. Why didn't your hair grow at all? Vegeta: Uh...for your information, a pure Saiyan's hair does not change from the day that he is born. Bulma: Oh... Goku: Is that true...how 'bout that! Bulma: I guess that's why you've never needed a haircut. Goku: Hey yeah. But I wish I could do something about these split ends. Ha ha ha. Bulma: Try shampoo. Vegeta: I don't have time to listen to Kakarot's hair problems. Bulma: (about Saiyan combat armor) Hey, aren't you going to wear yours? Piccolo: I am a Namek, not a Saiyan. And I'm not going to dress like one. Tien: That's right. I refuse to wear the same suit as Vegeta! Not after all of the horrible things he's done. Android 16: Why is Cell so determined to become more powerful? He is already stronger than any other creature on this planet. What is he trying to achieve? What is the point to this destruction? Vegeta: I find it hard to believe that my cells are in your body. How could you have turned out so ugly? What a waste. Although, it's obvious where you've gotten most of your strength. Cell: You should consider it an honor to be part of me. I am the strongest in the universe. Trunks: I hope this isn't a private party. Cell: Is that you Trunks? It appears you've been through some changes as well. Ah, so I guess it's two Saiyans for the price of one. Will your other friends be joining us too? Vegeta: There will be no more interruptions. And he's only here to watch the fight. I don't need reinforcements. Cell: Uh...just you...now that won't be much of a challenge. Vegeta: For me...absolutely not. Android 16: Vegeta has changed. His power has grown since the last time you fought. He just may have a chance. Android 18: What? How? How could he have changed that much so quickly? Was he just toying around with me? Do you really think he might beat Cell? Vegeta: (to Cell) Are you ready now...to witness a power not seen for thousands of years? Tien: Vegeta can't beat Cell alone. Piccolo: Let him try. He's determined to prove himself to all of us. Vegeta, it's your turn. Now show us what a pure blooded Saiyan can really do. Vegeta: (after ramming his fist into Cell's gut) What's wrong? I hope I'm not making you uncomfortable. Cell: Grr...what's wrong!? I'll show you- oh wait...you're making a joke...heh heh heh heh heh. I do so enjoy your classic Saiyan wit. Vegeta: Thank you. Cell: You insignificant pest! Are you really so proud of these irritating little tricks you've learned? You'll need much more if you ever hope to beat me! Cell: You fool! Have you forgotten? I know you! Your cells are woven into my very being! You, Vegeta, are a part of me! Vegeta: Now I'm going to take you apart! How ironic! Trunks: (to himself, about Vegeta) Father, one day I will prove myself to you. Maybe then you'll understand. All of these dangers that you're so eager to face, you don't have to face them alone. Vegeta: (after Cell punches him in the face) That one was free. Now I'm going to show you what true power really is. Cell: You're not Vegeta. You're not! You've changed. You've...you've become something else. Vegeta: Heh heh heh. That's right. I am Super Vegeta. Cell: How did you acquire this new strength? Enlighten me. Vegeta: I do a lot of push ups and sit ups, and I drink plenty of juice. Tien: What's the matter? You seem to be worried about something, but at least we're winning, right? Piccolo: It's Vegeta who's winning Tien, not us. Tien: Yeah, I guess I know what you mean. I have a hard time trusting in Vegeta as well. Cell: Super Vegeta! Grr...I am Cell! Do you hear me!? Vegeta: You are nothing. Yamcha: Man, fifty channels and nothing. What's this world coming to? Chiaotzu: How can you guys watch TV? I can't stop thinking about Tien and the others. Chi-Chi: Well, when Goku's your husband and Gohan's your son, you can either let it all go or worry yourself to death. So...I'm trying to let it all go. Chiaotzu: I thought you were just being heartless. Cell: Vegeta, allow me to achieve my final perfect form. As a Saiyan, you can appreciate the challenge. Trunks: (to himself) Father, no. He's deceiving you. Cell: What do ya say Vegeta? Vegeta: You still sound like a baby who is trying to get his way. Cell: No! I refuse to believe that this is my fate! I am Cell! This isn't supposed to be happening to me! Cell: Fascinating. Yes, this would be a rare match indeed. Vegeta: If you don't run away... Trunks: Please no father! That's your weak point. Can't you see? Cell's exploiting your only weakness! Vegeta: Shut up you fool! Mind your own business. I don't remember asking you for your opinion on the matter. How can you understand my power? I've gone beyond a Super Saiyan! Cell: Move along kid. I don't have the patience to deal with you right now, you young punk! Trunks: You'll need a lot more than patience to deal with me. Vegeta: (about Trunks) Darn kid. Just like his father. Vegeta: (about Trunks) Stupid boy! This is too good an opportunity for you to screw up! Cell: From the looks of it 16, I'd say your batteries are running low. Now, thanks to Vegeta, I will finally reach the perfection that my designer intended. Krillin: Vegeta...I should've known. Cell: Yes, he is a brave one. Incredibly stupid, but brave nonetheless. Trunks: You're wrong father! You can't let him reach his final form! There's a good chance that he'll become stronger than both of us! Vegeta: Heh heh. But that's the thrill! Don't you wanna see this power he keeps talking about? Trunks: No. I've seen it all my life. Dende: Honorable elder! Honorable elder! Muuri: Ah, Dende. You have sensed it as well. Dende: Ah, yes! But who could be behind such a power? This is the most terrible energy that I have ever felt! Muuri: I do not know my son. But from the sheer magnitude of this bio-energy, it may not only destroy planet Earth but the entire universe as well! Dende: Huh! The entire universe!? Krillin: (Cell goes into his perfect form) This is all my fault because I destroyed that stupid remote! Vegeta: (to himself) Yes, Cell's final transformation is at last at hand. Soon, he will be the greatest adversary I have ever faced. Piccolo: Vegeta, you've doomed us all. Cell: (after becoming Perfect Cell) At last. All that I have ever imagined is now mine. I have become what no other could ever achieve. I am perfect. Cell: (as Krillin and Trunks are punching and kicking him and it has no effect) Yes, that's right children. Have your fun. Cell: So you want to play, huh? Very well, it's my turn. Are you ready? Cell: (about Krillin) Hah. He should feel lucky. He's the first one to be touched by my perfect body. Vegeta: Don't tell me you're satisfied swatting flies like him. Heh. Guess a guy like you needs any victory he can get. From the way you've been carrying on, I was expecting a true challenge. If that's your idea of perfect, I might as well go home. Cell: I'm sorry to hear that. I was hoping you'd stay. Destroying you would be a decent warmup. Vegeta: Uh? Alright, but this time don't whine when I beat you. Cell: I won't. Android 16: I never guessed 18 would give Cell this much power. Now we are all doomed. Android 16: How could Dr. Gero have created such a monster? Krillin: Did you see that!? Vegeta gave him a boot to the head and it didn't even phase him. I told you...Cell's turned into some kind o'...some kind of mechanical freak! Cell: So Vegeta, you understand now what I mean by perfection? Hmmm? Or shall I educate you further? Krillin: Come on Trunks. What are you waiting for? If you take any more time, Vegeta is gonna be fish food. It's now or never bro, Vegeta may get mad, but at least he'll stay alive. Trunks: Wait. I can't do anything to help him until the moment he loses consciousness, that way he won't find out that I've become even stronger than he is. Krillin: Forget his pride! Trunks: But I can't! Krillin: Huh!? Trunks: I don't think you realize how much honor means to my father. It's the only thing that keeps him going. It's what makes him a warrior. Oh sure, some might see it as arrogance, but I think down at the core, it's much more noble than that. I believe that's what my mother saw in him. And it's what I see too. Krillin: I didn't know. Trunks: How could you...? Cell: Ah ah ah. Don't even think about it 16. If you value what's left of your head, I suggest you stay right where you are. Trunks: So that's what he's doing. He's trying to provoke Cell into challenging his attack. Krillin: Yah! Okay, that's one explanation. How 'bout this one. Vegeta's lost his mind and he's gonna fry us all! Cell: Now Vegeta. I will end your miserable life. Krillin: Man, what a relief. Trunks, I sure am glad you're still one of the good guys. For a minute, I thought you were gonna pull a Gohan and go ape. Cell: Don't you think Vegeta is right where he belongs? With his face...in the mud! Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Trunks: It's all over Cell. Cell: Well, I've heard that one before. Cell: You Saiyans are like cockroaches. Squash one, and another crawls out from the wall. Cell: What's that saying...like father, like son...yes...you are as headstrong as Vegeta, but soon you'll be wishing your head was stronger when I'm crushing it. Cell: Looks like you've saved Vegeta for now. Trunks: Huh? Cell: What? Thought I didn't see, huh? Trunks: Grr...why'd you let me? Cell: Isn't it obvious? I'm interested in you, not him. I can kill him anytime I want. Trunks: Not if I can help it. Cell: Your loyalty to your father is a sign of weakness, Trunks. It will be your downfall. But enough about your weakling father. I'd much rather address my fight with you. Cell: It's a shame Vegeta isn't here to see that you have surpassed his power. Trunks: As long as I have the power to destroy you Cell, that's all that matters to me. Cell: Hmm... Trunks: Your kind ruined my future. And I'll sacrifice everything to change it. Cell: At first there was resistance, but I consumed all who challenged me and the rest fell in line. There really is nothing better than the cold taste of fear. Cell: By traveling back in time, you thought you could change the events of the future, didn't you? Well, let me assure you that you were successful...though not quite in the way you planned. Rather than prevent the world's destruction...ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha...you've guaranteed it! Trunks: You can not win Cell. I'm gonna make sure that all androids are gone for good! Cell: Impressive. I must admit you have exceeded me Trunks. At least in the area of brute strength. Heh heh. And yet, you have absolutely no chance of defeating me. Cell: What a disappointment you are. You're so pathetic, I can't even test my complete power on you. Cell: Are you finished yet, or are you going to get up and entertain me some more? Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Get up. Or I'll put you down permanently. Cell: You said you'd show me true Saiyan power. But all that you've done is pump up your little muscles. And there's nothing special about that. I could do that too if I wanted. Trunks: You can finish me if you want. I've failed. Cell: Hmm...how very gracious of you. Trunks: Wait. Tell me. What is the real purpose of this tournament? What are you really going to do? Cell, I know what you androids are like. I'm sure this is some sort of a trick. Just a trap to get us all in one place, right? Cell: Oh, must you always treat everything like it's the end of the world? There is no secret purpose. I simply want to get as much out of this planet as I can before I destroy it. I have proven that I am unstoppable. Neither you or your friends are any threat to me now. However, there is one that I want to test my complete power against. I want you to bring me Goku. This tournament is sure to be a guaranteed hit. Everyone will be watching me. I just can't wait to see that look of panic and fear. Trunks: Eh! Cell: That's it. That's the look. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Until then. Krillin: So, what's the deal? Who's gonna be in this? I mean, nobody can beat Cell so it won't be much of a tournament. Trunks: Yes, you're right. I thought I could beat him. I was certain I could do it. But I failed. Maybe he is unstoppable. Chiaotzu: Can anyone he wants enter the competition? Trunks: He'll take on anyone who challenges him. And he expects to have a battle with each of us...one by one. Master Roshi: Of course. You know what he's trying to do. I do. His plan is to eliminate the competition once and for all. Yamcha: Well, I kind o' like the idea of another martial arts tournament. I mean, hey. I think I'll dominate. Puar: Yeah! Lets get 'im! Yamcha: Yeah! Oolong: Just make sure you don't get another hand through your stomach. Miss Brief: Now wasn't there a martial arts tournament a long time ago? Master Roshi: That's correct. Ah yes. I believe I'll explain since I once won the tournament myself. Puar: What? Master Roshi? I never knew you won it. Oolong: Oh, you just had to get him started. Chiaotzu: But why would Cell host a tournament? Yamcha: Yeah, why? I mean if he wants to rule the world, why is he wasting time with this competition? Trunks: Cell doesn't want to rule the world. He wants to destroy it. Yamcha: Uh...? Chiaotzu: Huh? Trunks: The androids have never been interested in power. It's just that they find pleasure in causing fear and chaos. And Cell's no different. He's using this stupid tournament as a way to spread fear. Chi-Chi: So there. Gohan will have to start his studies right when he gets back and he will not be joining up with your little gang! Krillin: Our gang? Chiaotzu: What gang? Master Roshi: Hey, can I join? Heh heh. Krillin: Hey, I'm kind o' lookin' forward to this tournament. It could be fun. Heh heh heh. Vegeta: Go out and play if you want. But leave Cell to me. Because I don't want anyone getting in my way. Do you understand? Yamcha: That's a lot o' talk for someone who got pounded by Cell, don't you think? Oolong: (Baby Trunks starts pulling Future Trunks' hair) Gee, look at that. Trunks is pulling on Trunks' hair. Puar: (while training with Krillin, Yamcha kicks Krillin's head and falls backward) Be careful Yamcha. Krillin's head is pretty slippery. Yamcha: Wow Krillin. I think your head is your secret weapon. Krillin: Yeah, maybe. But you bruised my brain. Yamcha: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Come on, don't be a wimp. Your head is as hard as a rock. Krillin: Hey pal! Are you makin' fun of me!? Yamcha: I sure am! (Yamcha kangaroo kicks Krillin in the face) Cell: (in a broadcast to the people of Earth) Your boring lives are about to get a lot more interesting thanks to me. I have enjoyed terrorizing Earth but now I have something far more entertaining planned for this pathetic planet. Vegeta: Hear me out. I don't care about the people of Earth but I promise I will destroy Cell. Oolong: I got it. We borrow Bulma's ship, orbit the Earth, and then sit back and watch the fireworks. Puar: Oolong! Oolong: Yeah, I bet ol' Cell would never think to look for us up in outer space. Puar: Only a heartless soul would run and leave his friends behind. We're in this together. Goku: So that's it. A tournament, huh? I gotta say, it sounds interesting. Piccolo: What? Interesting? Gohan: Piccolo, can I have a new outfit just like yours? You were my first teacher. Piccolo: Yeah kid. It'll make you look really sharp. Cell: Right here is where the fate of the universe will be determined. So what do you think? Goku: I don't know. Seems kind of puny if it's supposed to decide all that, wouldn't you say? Cell: Heh heh heh heh heh heh. Goku: You're not the first person to try to rule the universe with a sword of injustice. They all failed. And so will you. Goku: I've spent months preparing for the day I'd face you in your final form. I've come a long way Cell. Cell: (pause) So have I. Goku: Hey, Yajirobe. How you doin'? Yajirobe: Oh, I know why you're here. And if you think I'm gonna help you fight in that stupid tournament, then you could just forget it. Goku: Aha ha ha. Thanks Yajirobe. But I wasn't going to ask you. Yajirobe: Like...I believe that. Next you'll be telling me that you just stopped by to say hello. Well, you know I'm the best kept secret weapon around. Goku: (after powering up) Well, that was about half of my power. What do ya think? Korin: That was only half!? What's wrong with people like you? Will you not be happy until you wreck the whole planet? Goku: So, how do I stack up against Cell? Korin: That's hard for me to answer. Hmmm...well...I don't know how precise I can be but...uh...to be blunt...I'd have to say Cell is stronger. Gohan: Uh!? Yajirobe: Then what are we waiting around for? Shouldn't we be like...planning our escape!? Chi-Chi: (Chi-Chi sees Gohan and Goku as Super Saiyans) But what happened? Where is my sweet little Gohan? Gohan: I'm right here, mom. Goku: Aha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha. Babe, you crack me up. Master Roshi: Calm down. Calm down. Chi-Chi: Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh!!!! (to Gohan) What happened to your beautiful black hair? Who gave you permission to dye it? (pulling on Gohan's hair) Goku: It's not dyed. It's just... Chi-Chi: (crying) My sweet little Gohan's become a punker! Goku: No, it's not like that. Cell: (while flying upward, about breathing in outer space) It's rare that I get to make use of Frieza and his father's wonderful genes. Lau: If you've seen...seen the Cell, then you know that there is no use in running away or building a shelter. I'm not sure why they're deluding themselves. Believing in the shelter brings them comfort, I guess. Lime: They're a bunch of fools, that's all. Lime: You'd never fight. You're too sweet, right. Gohan: Huh? Lime: You're too gentle, to fight, I mean. Gohan: You think so? Lime: Uh huh. I know so, for sure, I can see that. I like strong men, like my grandpa. He's a real fighter. Borbonne: Go home to your mommy, kid! Gohan: And where's your mom? Was she one of the ones that you locked outside? Borbonne: That's enough out of you, you delinquent! Hey, boys. All eyes here. Shut this kid up! Borbonne: (after Tao knocks Lime's grandfather, Lau, to the ground) Now finish him off General Tao! That'll teach him ta cross me! General Tao: Sure, that's what I'm paid for! I'm your friendly neighborhood killer! No hard feelings old man, it's just a job. General Tao: (after Gohan blocks Tao's Dodon ray) Say what!? Borbonne: What happened? Gohan: I happened. That's what! Krillin: So Vegeta was furious, and he was about to kill him for cutting off his tail. And Yajirobe goes, Please, sir. I really admire you, and i'd like to join you if it's not too late. [Goku and Gohan laugh from this but stops when Gohan's glass cup breaks when he was going to drink it] Goku: Man, again? You gotta control it like this. Watch me. [Goku picks up his glass cup but it also breaks] Chi-Chi: I don't believe it, not another one! Goku, this has got to stop! [pots and pans fall from the shelves] Goku: Sorry. Gohan: My chair! Goku: Gohan, here. Goku: Oh, man. We really did it this time. Krillin: Chi-Chi's gonna kill you guys! Hey, where'd she go? Chi-Chi: [Chi-Chi angrily burst out of the debri that she was buried in] HYAAAGH!! HERE I AM!! Alright you two, i've had it with this Super Saiyan stuff! You've broken both sets of dishes, and three tables! I swear, is it too much to ask to have a normal dinner where we don't smash glasses, and bend silverware, and break all the furniture?! Well, is it?! I'm waiting! Goku: No, sorry. Gohan: I have an idea. Maybe we should use paper plates and cups. Chi-Chi: Yeah? Well think again, kid! Gosh, what a funny sense of humor. Paper cups, and paper plates, you must get that from your mommy. I'll tell you what, Gohan. Since it's your birthday, i'm going to let you off easy. For your punishment, you can help me clean up. As for you Goku, hit the road! Don't call us, we'll call you. [Chi-Chi opens the door] Goku: Uh, you want me to leave home? Chi-Chi: Yes! I can't take it anymore, Goku. I need you gone. At least until I finish setting up for Gohan's party. You like to fish, right? Well go catch a fish, or something. Goku: Hey, sure. That sounds great, i'll catch a big one. Krillin: I'll go too. Gohan: Me too. Chi-Chi: Wonderful plan. But you can forget it, Gohan. Look, if you think you're getting off the hook that easy, you can think again, kiddo. After you finish cleaning up, it's time to study. Gohan: Anything but that, mom. Chi-Chi: A mother knows what's best, right? Gohan: Yeah, I guess. Goku: Hey, Gohan. Your mother is a hundred percent right. It would be best if you study this afternoon. [Gohan and Krillin were both shocked while Chi-Chi fainted from hearing this and the whole house jumped in the air] Goku: Huh? What did I do? Krillin: You don't know? Gohan: Gosh, daddy. Chi-Chi: Are you sick? [shoves a thermometer in Goku's mouth and put her hand on his forehead] You feel okay. Ox King: Don't you think it's time that you give the boy a name? Goku: Hm? Chi-Chi: I thought of one. It came to me last night. Ox King: Oh...I didn't know you picked already. Chi-Chi: Yes...Einstein! Goku: Hm? Einstein? You're kidding. Ox King: (same time as Goku) Hm? Einstein? You're kidding. Chi-Chi: Hardly. Our boy's name is going to be Einstein. Chi-Chi: Well, what do you think we should call him, dad? Ox King: Oh, I don't know. Uh...I did scribble a few names down. Ah, there. Here we are. (Ox King holds a scroll with lots of names) Lets see here. Ox King Junior. Ox Monkey. Big Ox. Oxford. Oh, you'll like these. Ox in the box. Ox Man. Johnny Oxseen. Reporter: (fearfully approaching Cell) Oh gosh. I just can't do this. Can we go home? I've lost my nerve. Reporter 2: Find it. Reporter: Ah gee. Chi-Chi: A normal kid would be severely punished for trashing his entire birthday cake on his birthday. But you can't help it. After all, you're Goku's son. It's family tradition, pure and simple. Vegeta: (Piccolo is in the hyperbolic time chamber) What is taking that Namek so long? Really! Doesn't he know he's wasting important people's time. Mister Popo: Well, he's almost done. Just...stay calm. Vegeta: Calm!? (Vegeta kicks the hyperbolic time chamber door) Oh, I will show you calm. If he stays there any longer, I'll knock that door down and calmly drag him out! Goku: (to Gohan) Now, son...lets try to enjoy ourselves and not worry about Cell. There'll be plenty of time for that. Cell: (about the entire military division preparing to launch a full-scale attack against him) Pathetic. All these men still playing with toys. Goku: Oh wow, Piccolo. You've been doing some training in the hyperbolic time chamber, haven't you? Piccolo: That's right. Goku: I can really tell. You're strong. A lot more powerful than before. Piccolo: Why don't you just say it? I'm stronger but you still don't think I can beat Cell. Goku: Nope. Don't stand a chance. Piccolo: Thanks. You've always been the honest one. King Kai: So, what brings you up here? Need some good jokes? Goku: No, no jokes. Not right now. Don't you know about all the horrible things that are happening on Earth? King Kai: (to Goku) An android...well, that's a new one. And you say he's even stronger than Frieza? Must be hard for you to get good life insurance. Trouble follows you like a lost puppy. King Kai: (when Goku is going to try the instant transmission) I see...instant transmission. The Yardrat's trick. Ooo...I bet they taught you that while you were staying with them...didn't they? Didn't they? Didn't they? (while King Kai does the instant transmission quickly) You know, I always thought it had some handy uses. I could've taught you. But...you never asked me. Never asked. Ha. Hercule Satan: This was all just a cheap trick. Cell planted bombs just before the military came. He might be an expert with explosives. But, as you can see, from a martial arts standpoint, he's an amateur. And I, Hercule, the greatest fighter in the world, will crush that fake with my little finger. Now, yell if you love me! Krillin: (viewing Hercule on television) Eh, man that guy's a real moron. Trunks: Gohan, did your father tell you anything? Gohan: Eh? Trunks: We've all heard Goku say that Cell is stronger than he is and that Cell has no weaknesses. So why is he acting so cheerful? Gohan: I've asked my dad and he hasn't told me anything. All he says is don't worry. Trunks: Don't worry...!? Krillin: I don't know. I mean, if that's what he said, maybe he really does have some plan to defeat Cell. Piccolo: Or maybe he's in denial. Cell: (waiting for the tournament to begin) How boring. I should not have given them this long. Krillin: (after watching Gohan and Dende studying) All this homework...this is giving me bad flashbacks...from algebra class. Hercule Satan: So, you wanna know what I'm gonna do to Cell? Exactly the same thing I'm gonna do to this bus! (Hercule punches a hole through a bus) General Tao: Now just give up the Dragon Balls nice and slow and then go away or this is going to get very ugly. Goku: Huh? Hey, General Tao! Is that you? General Tao: Pardon? Goku: Remember me? My name's Goku. General Tao: Go-ku? Goku: We've had our differences, but it's good to see you again. General Tao: (after performing a cybernetic scan with his visors to confirm it's Goku) Why me? Why? Vodka: (after Goku shatters the protective shield surrounding Vodka and his men) General! Please...make...him...go...away! General Tao: Well, I'm feeling a bit...sick today. Vodka: (after Tao tricks Goku into playing with puzzle rings) General Tao, you're my new hero. General Tao: I know, Mister Vodka. I know. Hercule Satan: I'd like to give Cell my condolences. It's too bad my unworthy opponent didn't know that I existed before he started this tournament of his. Announcer: Anything else? Hercule Satan: I'll give him one last chance to back out. He might think he's a champ, but he's just a chump! Master Roshi: (about Hercule, after watching Hercule act out in front of Cell on television) You know, it might be fair if he gets killed! Announcer: (to Vegeta) So, who are you and what are you doing here? And if you've just come to watch, back away from the ring before you get hurt. Vegeta: Quiet. I've had enough of your insolence. Get out of my face! Announcer: (to Hercule, about Vegeta) If you ask me, that guy's totally nuts. Have any thoughts, champ? Hercule Satan: Uh...well...he's probably just one of my fanatical fans. Announcer: But how? How is it physically possible for all of them to fly? Hercule Satan: Heh...I guess that trick's very popular today... Goku: Okay then. Lets get this thing going. And if you want, I'll be first. Trunks: Goku, you don't have to be the first one to fight. Goku: What do ya say, Vegeta? Vegeta: Be my guest. We all know it will be me who ends up finishing Cell. Announcer: So, lets set the scene...the first up will be Mister Satan, who of course will win and then the Earth will be saved from total destruction. Caroni: Maestro, please...let us take care of him. There's no point in your fighting this...sissy. Pirozhki: I will crush him up! Hercule Satan: Hmm...you're right. It could be a little embarrassing for me to take on such an amateur as Cell. Caroni: (to Cell, while holding a bouquet of flowers) As this is the first chance we've had to fight or what not, I'll be gentle. (sniffs the flowers, tosses them into the air, jumps up and performs a few combos in midair to the flowers, allowing the sliced petals to fall to the ground) Those are for you. A bouquet for your funeral. Caroni: (to himself) I wonder how many women are watching me right now... Cell: (to himself, about Hercule) His ignorance is painful. Hercule Satan: (after breaking some ceramic tiles) Cell, you see these pieces of busted tile on the ground...heh heh...well that's what I'm gonna do...to your face! Cell: As I'm sure you know by now, I've been waiting for this. Killing the helpless quickly grows old. Heh heh. I'm counting on you for amusement while I test my body. Goku: I hear you're designed to use all of our techniques against us. Cell: Perfection. Vegeta: (about Hercule) That ridiculous man hasn't realized his weakness. His stupidity is beyond belief. Hercule Satan: (about Goku) Well, if I were fightin' that twerp, I'd bend him into a pretzel and eat him for lunch...but lucky for him, I'm on a strict diet. Cell: (to Goku) Little by little, I shall reveal to you...the perfect power that lies within me. Hercule Satan: They keep on cheating with these second grade illusions. They clearly have no respect for the martial arts. Announcer: Lets get a professional opinion from Earth's greatest fighter. What do you think of this action packed match so far, Mr. Satan? Hercule Satan: Uh...not bad. Ha ha ha ha ha. Announcer: Uh, thanks. Mr. Satan, ladies and gentlemen...a man of few words but with large fists. Hercule Satan: (after Cell splits into four separate bodies and attacks Goku at the same time) This is the best magic trick I've ever seen. Goku: There's no way you can beat me with your stolen fighting techniques. Now, give up. Cell: Hmph. No, not yet. It's over when I say it's over. Goku: (after Goku dodges a Kamehameha from Cell) You know, that blast would've completely destroyed the Earth if I hadn't flown up and diverted it. Cell: Yeah, maybe so. But I knew you would do something heroic to save it. Goku: Heh heh. Oh I see, so you were counting on me. Cell: Well don't get the wrong idea. I don't care one bit about this planet or its filthy people. But without it, there'd be no one to kill! Cell: (Cell appears behind Goku) Am I too fast for you, Goku? Hercule Satan: (about Goku and Cell) There they are! They're right there in the ring. (Pointing to a crack on the ground) They're hiding in that broken part over there. It's another one of their tricks. Dende: There's trouble down there but I can't seem to focus on it. My mind is too clouded. Mister Popo: Dende, you sure remind me of Kami. He used to stand in that very same spot as he tried to make sense of the Earth. Dende: Did he really? Mister Popo: Oh yes. (pause) There's no need to be upset. Like the former guardians before you, it will take some time before you are comfortable with your new role as guardian of the Earth. Just relax, Dende. Stop doubting your own abilities and start listening with your mind. Calm your thoughts. Now, what do you see? Dende: The tournament is still on. It's a fierce battle. Mister Popo: See, you did it. Dende: Yes. Thank you Mister Popo. I know I'll never be able to replace Kami but I will try my best. I promise. I just wish there was something more that I could do. I feel so helpless. This tournament will decide the fate of the Earth and all I can do for now is watch and leave it to Goku. I may be this planet's guardian, but he is its hero. Android 16: It is time for all of you to evacuate...right now. Announcer: I don't think so, pal. This show must go on. Besides, we still have to let our champion have his shot at Cell. Cell: Now the whole desert is our ring. Lets say the last one standing wins the game. Goku: I see. So it's a fight to the finish. Cell: Would you have it any other way? Goku: No, I guess not. King Kai: (to Gregory and Bubbles) Say, would either of you care to make a wager on this tournament? Announcer: Cell has come out swinging and the unknown challenger seems to be using his face to block. That's gotta hurt. Caroni: (after Hercule slams face first into a boulder and gets stuck) Maestro, are you okay? Shall I give you a hand? Hercule Satan: (while stuck in the boulder) Uh, no. No problem here. Just gettin' warmed up, that's all. Piiza: What a man! Hercule, you are something else getting warmed up for battle like that! So that's how you do it! That's how you keep in such great shape! Hercule Satan: (still stuck) You know me...always ready for action. Cell: Are you feeling tired, Goku? You've lost a lot of strength. Heh heh heh. Why don't you take a breather? Perhaps one of those senzu beans would help you. Piccolo: (after Trunks suggests that Goku take a senzu bean) We will wait. Trunks: We'll wait for what? He needs a senzu bean! Vegeta: Quiet, boy! Where is your honor!? Like all pure-blooded Saiyans, Kakarot would rather die fighting than win with one of those disgraceful senzu beans as his crutch! Kakarot trained in the hyperbolic time chamber just as we did! Now lets see what he can do! Trunks: No, we can't. Goku doesn't have the strength. Don't you see what will happen if he keeps going like this? Vegeta: If this goes on...then he will die. Trunks: Uh! Tien: Uh! Yamcha: Uh! Vegeta: But, that will be his decision. It is painfully clear at this point that no one among this group is stronger than Kakarot is. Not even myself. So he deserves to have the fight of a true warrior. And that means...to the death! Trunks: While we all just stand here and watch? I won't be part of it! Vegeta: Aren't you the one who has never stopped talking about how great a hero Kakarot is? If you have so much faith in him, then wait and see what he will do. Cell: (to Goku) I can feel your power slipping away, Goku. I don't think you can last much longer. Heh heh heh heh. You know it's hardly worth my effort to finish you off now, but I wouldn't want to disappoint the television audience because I know they want to see a real champion. The next battle we engage in will be your last, Goku. Vegeta: (to himself) What are you thinking, Kakarot? There must be a plan behind all this...this insanity! Goku: I may be giving up, but that doesn't mean the tournament's over. There's still one more person for you to fight. Cell: You're not serious! Who? One of them!? And exactly which one of these pitiful specimens did you have in mind, Goku? Who? Trunks, Piccolo, Vegeta? Please, don't waste my time. Cell: (to himself, about Goku) Disappointing. He promises me a challenge and he gives me nothing but a child! Krillin: (to Goku, after Goku tosses a senzu bean to Cell) Okay, it's official! You've completely lost it! Goku: Look, Cell's kind of worn out right now. It just wouldn't be fair if Gohan beats him when he isn't at his best, you know. Yamcha: That...that's Cell up there! Who really cares about being fair!? Cell: (to himself, about Goku) Heh heh heh heh heh. What a fool. Doesn't he realize...? The only thing he's managed to do here is ensure his son's demise. Cell: (to Gohan) Well, I'll give you this. You certainly are brave. And loyal too. Not many sons are willing to die fighting their father's battles, you know. Your devotion really is most admirable. Cell: Good fight, kid. But I'm afraid to say, like all good things, it must come to an end. Piccolo: Goku, you fool. We told you this would happen. We told you. But you wouldn't listen to us! Well, maybe you'll hear this. Your son's dead, Goku. He's dead! Gohan: We don't have to do this. This fight, Cell...it's meaningless. Cell: Huh? Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha! You sound just like your father! Do you honestly think I'll stop my Cell games just because you think they're meaningless? Gohan: Yes. Cell: Well, think again. Let me explain something to you. You have to fight. Unless you beat me here today, I'll destroy the Earth. Now how's that for meaning. Gohan: I'm telling you I don't wanna fight anymore, Cell. Even though you're evil...I really have no desire to kill you. Gohan: (to Cell) Krillin, my friend, was sinking to the bottom of that lake, dying. And Frieza, that cold-blooded monster was actually enjoying it. I couldn't control what happened next. I attacked. I didn't care that Frieza was the most powerful fighter in the universe. I didn't care that he had the ability to destroy entire planets with a single finger. All I knew was that I had to help my friend...and the only way to him was through Frieza. Cell: You see, Gohan, this hidden power of yours intrigues me, and now that I know about it, I'm determined to see it for myself! Piccolo: (Cell is crushing Gohan in a bear hug while Goku waits for Gohan to unleash his power) Gohan may have that power but it doesn't matter. He doesn't thirst for battle and mayhem. He's not a fighter like you! Goku: (Goku gets worried) Ah!? Piccolo: Do you want to know what he's thinking? He's not thinking about strength or about competition! He's wondering why his father is standing there letting him die! And so your son may be the most powerful person in the world but he's also a scared eleven year old boy. I'd rather die than wait! Cell: (to Gohan) Stubborn creature. You refuse to fight back despite all the pain that I inflict on you! Perhaps you'd respond better to the pain of your dear old friends! Android 16: (while squeezing Cell in a bear hug) I have a powerful explosive embedded deep in my body. It was intended to be a last resort. I am sorry that we androids have caused so much suffering here on the Earth. Cell, no matter how strong you have become...you will not survive this explosion! Android 16: (while squeezing Cell in a bear hug) Cell, you destroy life. You are a parasite to this planet. And I see now that this is the best way to destroy you. Dr. Gero's sick ambition to terrorize the world through us will ultimately be put to rest...by his own devices. Cell: (after blowing up Android 16 into pieces) 16. His petty existence proved Dr. Gero had his flaws. Announcer: Mister Satan...how is it? Hercule Satan: Huh? Announcer: Your dreadful stomach virus...how is it? Hercule Satan: You know, just because I don't scream and whine about it all the time like a little sissy...doesn't mean that it still isn't threatening my life! Announcer: Oh, well of course not. Hercule Satan: A stomach pain like this would've killed any normal man. I'm the only guy in the world with the strength to bare it! Cameraman: You know we can't keep filming...when we're torn into little pieces. Announcer: Yes, good point. What do ya say we get on out of here...our fans'll understand. Pirozhki: Maestro Satan, can we go with them? Hercule Satan: Go if you want, but a true champion never runs from danger. Caroni: So you're going to stay here? Hercule Satan: You bet. First I'll go to the hospital to fix my stomach of course. But then I'll return. Now, I am off to the doctor's so I can come back and win. Android 16: I thought you would be eager to help the planet. You are its greatest champion, are you not? Announcer: Mister Satan is the world champion of mankind, and that doesn't include monsters like you and Cell. You got it!? Hercule Satan: Hey, shut up! They might be monsters but I can crush them all with one hand! Cell: (to Cell Juniors) Hey! Hurry up now! First one with a kill wins a prize! Android 16: Gohan... let it go. It is not a sin to fight for the right cause. There are those who words alone will not reach. Cell is such a being. I know how you feel, Gohan. You are gentle, you do not like to hurt. I know because I too have learned these feelings, but it is because you cherish life that you must protect it... Cell: Uh. This sentimental downpour is killing me. It's so nice of you to help, 16. But I plan on doing this my way. Android 16: Please, drop your restraints. Protect the life I loved. You have the strength. My scanner sensed it. Just.... let it go... (Cell stomps his foot down on what remained of Android 16's head, killing him) Cell: Yet another fighter...you could have saved. Gohan: 16, you loved life. You gave everything up to save it. And you were just an Android. I let you die...I can't do that...I won't watch anymore. I...I feel it slipping. And I won't watch this anymore! (Gohan erupts with rage) Cell: You are making the same mistake Trunks did, boy. Don't think you can beat me just by powering up. Gohan: (to Cell) I can never forgive you for what you've done. Chi-Chi: Oh my brave little warrior. He's too young to be fighting. He should be at home studying. But no, he had to listen to his father instead of me. Ox King: Hey! Your son Gohan is no longer a baby! Why, he's transcended Goku and now he's become an honorable Saiyan warrior. If you haven't figured it out by now, both your husband and your son are battling to save an entire planet! And without them, we have nothing! Oh sure, I wish it was me instead of him, but Gohan is the only hope we have left! Hercule Satan: No one's watching me! Don't they realize that I'm the real star of this show!? I'm the one who threw that guy's head over there! This is all because of me! Vegeta: After all the time we spent trying to kill these things, he does it in one blow! Gohan: (to a Cell Junior, right before slicing him in half) I said before, I could never forgive you! Caroni: Hey, lets get out of here Pirozhki. I'll simply die if I lose any more teeth! Vegeta: (to himself) No! This is maddening! It's bad enough that Kakarot has surpassed me in power, but now his son has too!? Cell: Don't get too confident, for I have yet to show you young warrior what I'm truly capable of. But you will see soon enough. Gohan: Can it. Cell: Huh!? Ah, a cheeky one. Well then, lets see how you fare against me when I fight at full strength! Cell: (after charging up to his maximum) So kid, are you impressed by what you see? Gohan: Is that all you've got? Cell: (after Cell is easily pummeled by Gohan, he begins to choke) He only...had two punches that made contact...so why am i so....so damaged? Cell: I will not be humiliated by a child! This has gone far enough! I am tired of playing these games! Grrr.... (to himself) This can't be happening. I am complete. It is impossible for a Saiyan child to defeat me! I am the ultimate fighter. I have no equal. Yet, somehow this one is different. Very well, if I must prove myself once again then so be it but this will be the last time. Grr... Gohan: What are you so afraid of Cell? Isn't this what you wanted? I warned you! I told you what would happen if you pushed me too far! But you didn't listen! You forced me to awaken my hidden power! And now that you've seen it, you're afraid...because you know that I'm going to destroy you! Cell: No! He's a boy! There's no way that little brat can be so strong! Goku: Gohan! You've got to take Cell down now before he can regenerate! Gohan: Take him down now? No, I think I'll wait. I'm going to let him suffer for a little while. Cell: (after getting rammed in the face by Gohan) Ugh! You're not a boy...you're a monster! (Gohan kicks Cell in the stomach and Cell begins to choke) What have you done to me!? Announcer: (holding a microphone) Oh my, I don't believe it! It looks like Cell has been damaged beyond repair! Is this the end!? Will that tough kid be declared the champ? Has he won the Cell game!? Cameraman: Uh...boss...the microphone is still broken. Announcer: Just great! This is such a shame. My voice has been silenced. Cell: (to Gohan, fearfully) Stay away from me, you monster! Cell: (to Gohan) Boy, this is the end for you! You thought you could beat me, but you can't! Ha ha ha! I'm going to blow myself up now! And I'm going to take you with me! Say goodbye to your precious planet! Cell: (to Gohan) Watch out! You might make me explode! You don't wanna make me upset! One little shock could set me off! Then it's bye bye Gohan...buh-bye Goku and so long Earth! Cell: (to Gohan) Ten more seconds and the Earth will be gone. I guess we'll call this game a draw! Goku: (Cell is about to explode) Hey, you put up a good fight, Gohan. I'm proud of you. Gohan: What? Daddy? Goku: Take care of your mother for me. She needs you. Tell her that I had to do this, Gohan. Gohan: Ah! Goku: Goodbye, my son. Piccolo: Goku! Cell: No! Don't! (Goku uses his instant transmission to teleport the exploding Cell away from Earth) Gohan: No! Come back! Krillin: Goku!!!!! Vegeta: Uh! Piccolo: Ah! Trunks: Uh! Yamcha: Ah! Tien: Uh! King Kai: (Goku teleports to King Kai's planet with the exploding Cell) Ahhhh!!!! Goku! What have you done? Are you out of your mind? Goku: Sorry guys. This is the only place I could think to bring him. King Kai: Well, you could've called first! Cell: Ahhhhh!!! Aughhhhhhh!!! (Cell explodes, killing Goku, King Kai, Bubbles, and Gregory along with him) Gohan: One thing I learned from my father is to never give up, even when the odds are stacked against you. Vegeta: (to himself, after Trunks is fatally wounded by Cell's blast) How could I let this happen to my son? He has sacrificed everything for me! And I have done nothing but ignore him! No! I won't give up on him! There is still time to change things! Cell has crossed me for the last time! He has tricked me in battle, mocked my Saiyan ancestry, but this...this time he's gone too far...he will pay the ultimate price...for what he has done to my son! Vegeta: At last...it's over. Cell: Wrong. It's over when I say it's over! (Cell smacks Vegeta away with one jab) Cell: (after injuring Vegeta and Gohan) Why would Gohan sacrifice himself to save Vegeta? Hm...I will never understand the ways of these Saiyans. (Gohan and Vegeta are lying next to each other, badly bruised) Look at them. They belong together.  They are both so...weak! Cell: First I'll destroy you, then your friends, and then this worthless planet! But before I do, I want you to remember something! I will live forever! Cell: Ha ha ha ha ha ha! This place has been good to me, but all my feasting here is done! And I'd hate to leave without first cleaning my plate! Soon, it'll be nothing but a cloud of dust! Vegeta: (while bruised and lying on the ground) I've become completely useless on this battlefield! I'm making a total mockery of my Saiyan race! (struggling) I'm sorry Gohan. I am. Gohan: (to himself) Sorry? I never thought I'd hear that from Vegeta. He must be saying that, since he knows there's nothing we can do. Cell: Ultimate perfection...I have spent decades waiting for it and I thought after absorbing the androids, my game had been won...but now, only now do I understand what Dr. Gero meant by those words...ultimate perfection. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Dr. Gero: (Android 17 holds some blueprints) Careful! Those are the blueprints for my ultimate android! Android 17: Ultimate android? I'm standing right here. Dr. Gero: Idiot! you won't even tread water against what I'm creating. Because unlike you, he won't rely on gears or computer chips. He'll be purely bio-mechanical. Now, unless you want me to push the button again, go back to your capsules and sleep! Cell: (about Gohan, after Gohan speaks to Goku telepathically) Look! He's been driven insane by his own fear! Hercule Satan: (about Cell and Gohan in their deadly clash) It's a trick! It's all a trick, I swear! Someday, I'll bring it all to light! I will! Caroni: I can't believe that you're still saying that! Cell: (to Gohan, after Gohan speaks to Goku telepathically) What on Earth are you mumbling about? Chanting a little prayer before you die? Cell: (to Gohan) You fool! Don't you realize yet you're up against the perfect weapon!? Cell: (after Krillin, Piccolo, Yamcha, and Tien attack Cell from behind) Why can't you people just stay down!? Piccolo: (while Gohan is struggling to defeat Cell) No Gohan, I won't let you die all alone out there, 'cause kid you were the first person to ever show me what it means to have a friend. Cell: Vegeta! Goku: NOW'S YOUR CHANCE!!!! Piccolo: (about Vegeta attacking Cell) That was brave, what you did. Vegeta: You can save your applause. Now go on, I don't need anybody's help. Piccolo: (smiling) Your call. (Piccolo leaves) Vegeta: (to himself, about Goku) He has beaten me completely. First by his own actions and then through his son's. And what has he left for me here? How? How could you die like that? How, Kakarot? I'll never have the chance...to prove my strength against you. You died without fear. What does that make of me? I am no warrior. And I will never fight again. Announcer: So where is Cell? Did you see what happened to him? Hercule Satan: Uh...oh...well...what if I said that...I defeated Cell singlehandedly! You believe me? Cameraman: Hey, some o' the equipment's still running. Piiza: Wow, Hercule! You really are a great, great man! Caroni: You hid your strength right until the end. You sure know how to give people a good show. Announcer: So, is it true you really beat him? Hercule Satan: Sure. Why wouldn't it be? Announcer: But, just how did you do it? Hercule Satan: Well, piece o' cake really. I just got so irritated with the light shows and the tricks, I shouted Hey! I've had enough o' your light shows and tricks and I just walked over there to Cell and I gave 'im a good chop! Ha ha! Ha ha ha! Yeah! Chop! Yeah! Piiza: (happy) Oh, Hercule. Announcer: But...then what...happened to the little boy and all his friends on the cliff? Hercule Satan: Chop! Yeah...hmm...well, they all thanked me kindly and went home, of course. Chi-Chi: (after hearing Mr. Satan's lies about defeating Cell) It's not fair! They deserve to know what Gohan did! Ox King: I know... Yajirobe: Yeah! Way to win one for the team! Krillin: Yajirobe? Yajirobe: Yeah, I was on my way to meet you guys but...my plane broke down. I really wanted to help. Yamcha: Oh, such bad luck. Krillin: Funny. It always happens to you. Piccolo: (to Android 18) You should thank Krillin, 18. He stayed at your side the whole time. After Cell spat you out. Krillin: (shy) Uh...ah...well, it was nothing really. I mean, I enjoyed it. I mean, I couldn't leave you there. Gohan: I got it! Krillin: Uh! Gohan: Krillin! You have a crush on Android 18, don't you!? Krillin: (smacks Gohan on the head) Thanks, Mister Smooth! Yamcha: What!? How could you? Krillin, she's a- Tien: You know she's an android, right pal? Krillin: Heh heh...heh heh heh heh... Android 18: Expect me to fall at your feet now? Big strong boy rescues me so I'm his forever, right? Not that easy. I was wrong about you, Krillin. (Android 18 leaves) Krillin: But...I... Yamcha: That ungrateful...! I can't stand that android! I'm gonna show her! Tien: I'm not so sure you could do that... Piccolo: We've wasted enough time here. Lets hurry up and summon the dragon so we can start undoing all the damage that Cell has done. Mister Popo: Yes, of course. Gohan: Yeah! That means Trunks'll come back and Dende and me! You'll have plenty of friends here so you won't even need a girl! Krillin: (sad) Leave me alone... Tien: Hey, you like the girl, right? So what's up? Why did you wanna wish that guy back too? Krillin: Well, I know it's strange...but I want her to be truly happy. And those two make such a good couple that I thought she'd be happier with him. Well, that's why. Yamcha: Dude, you're hopeless. Piccolo: If that's what you humans call love, count me out. Android 18: Time for bonus points. Krillin: Oh wow! There she is! How'd she get here? Android 18: Hey, boneheads! 17 is my twin brother! Krillin: Oh man... Yamcha: No, this is excellent, you dope! Didn't you hear her, that guy's her twin brother! Ha ha ha! Android 18: I wouldn't celebrate if I were you! Krillin: Uh... Android 18: If you think you won my heart because of that lousy wish, you're mistaken. I didn't ask for your help. (softer) But it was really nice of you. Krillin: It was...? You...you mean...you're not mad at me? Android 18: Not really...no. Krillin: Well then, would you like to come over and join us? Android 18: No thanks. Krillin: Aww man... (Android 18 dashes away) Yamcha: Aha ha! Ha! Whoah, Krillin! You are so in there! That chick digs you man! I can tell! Krillin: Are you sure? Yamcha: Yes, I'm sure. But she's a woman dude! Oh man! Like I say, she's a girl and there's no tellin' but I think you have a chance. Stick close to my advice and you'll do just fine. After all Krillin, it's my specialty. Trust me. Goku may have taught you how to be a great fighter, but when it comes to love, I'm the master! Ha ha ha ha ha! Gohan: Aha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha! Piccolo: There's no comparison. Yamcha: I heard that. At least you're man enough to admit it, Piccolo. Fighting's relatively easy. Chi-Chi: (to herself, after Gohan and Ox King sneak out of the window for a break) Honestly, escaping through the window. How juvenile can they get? It won't last. They'll come crawling back right around dinner time. Uh huh. Gohan: (after easily pummeling a Pteradactyl who was trying to steal his fish) Man, what a feisty old bird. Ox King: Yeah, what an unlucky bird. First he runs into the strongest guy in the world in the middle of nowhere and then he tries to take his fish. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Hercule Satan: (to himself) Ooh yeah. Hercule. Mister Satan. Who cares what they call me. I'm huge. King Kai: (about Hercule) I can't believe that guy. Taking all the credit for your hard work. It's despicable. Goku: He is a cheat. But you know what, he's a really good actor. King Kai: Well, I'm not amused. Imagine that face on a cereal box. Goku: Yeah man, I could see it now...Hercule puffs. King Kai: My...that is funny. Trunks: (to Bulma, about the androids) Nightmares never last, Mom. One day you wake up and they're gone. Android 17: Hey, it's you. Trunks: Yeah, it's me. The name's Trunks. Look, it's over. It stops here. Android 17: It does, huh? Trunks, don't you remember what happened last time? Nothing stops here except you. Android 18: Gosh, how rude. He is such an arrogant little punk. Man, that's it. I want him dead! It's a matter of principle. Android 17: I don't mind. Consider it done. (whispering to Android 18) But look sis...we'll be blowing weeks worth of fun...comprende? Android 18: I don't care. I need this. I've been in a bad mood all day. Android 18: (while being easily pummeled by Trunks) I hate you! Trunks: You hate the fact that you're powerless to stop me. That you're completely outmatched. Well, imagine feeling the way you do now all of the time like the people of this planet do. Fools. How do you think my master Gohan felt when you ganged up on him in the rain and he had no way out? Well, now it's your turn. I hope you enjoy it! Trunks: (Trunks senses Cell behind him) Hm? Hey, mom...would you mind going inside now? Bulma: What? Inside? But why? (comical) Ah...where is she, Trunks? I know you...who has a new girlfriend? Aha ha... Trunks: Mom. Bulma: (serious) Huh? Trunks? (Bulma runs away) Trunks: Come on out, Cell. I know you're here. Cell: Huh!? Trunks: You're so lame, sneakin' around like the boogeyman. What's your plan, Cell? To kill me and take my time machine to the past? You're having trouble finding the androids, huh? I bet you just long to absorb them. Cell: What!? How do you know all this? Trunks: I read your palm, big guy. You have a short lifeline. Cell: Grr...so, you're a joker, huh!? Well, I don't like your jokes. I subscribe to a different kind of amusement than you Earthlings. Trunks: Yeah, I know how you get your kicks, Cell. But it's not going to happen anymore and I'm going to see to that. Cell: You shouldn't be throwing your life away like this. No one will know. Just let me leave. Trunks: There is someone watching. And laughing. A friend of mine that you killed in the past. He's someone I could never let down. Cell: Don't worry. You'll be seeing your friend shortly. Trunks: We'll see about that. Cell: Yes we will. You won't be alone. There's a long list. Now you too will be a part of me. That's right. I'm going to suck you up. Your energy will be refreshing. A nice treat to start off my journey in the time machine. Trunks: Enough, you freak! Cell: Don't you shush me, you little punk! Trunks: You're overconfident, Cell. Cell: There's no reason not to be. I've come across thousands like you. Trunks: Yes you have. But count me as the last! King Kai: Huh? What's wrong? (West Kai keeps staring at King Kai's halo) What? Stop staring! West Kai: Uh! King Kai: Ahh...! West Kai: Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! King Kai: Uh...what!? West Kai: Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! You really are dead! King Kai: Yeah, so what? West Kai: The North Kai is dead! Hee hee! After all your corny jokes, it's about time you were funny. Aha ha ha ha ha! King Kai: How dare you call my jokes corny, you little shrimp!? Grand Kai: Sorry to walk in on you guys like this. Listen, Pikkon. I need you to go straight to hell for me. Pikkon: Yes, sir. Goku: That's not very nice... Pikkon: I didn't ask you for your assistance... Goku: Yeah but I've already fought against both Cell and Frieza and you haven't, and unless you're something crazy, you're gonna need help. Goku: It's sad. Even in death, you refuse to learn. Cell: Ha ha ha! Frieza: It's Goku! Goku: That's right, Frieza. I'm stopping you again! Frieza: Oh, but now the odds are stacked in my favor! Seven to one is good odds, wouldn't you say, boys? (The Ginyu Force appears behind Frieza and poses) Cell: (The villains are behind bars in hell) This stinks. King Cold: They could at least let us take showers. Recoome: Does anybody want ta arm wrestle? (all the other villains tell Recoome to shut up) West Kai: You know, none of us have ever seen a dead Kai before. South Kai: Not ever. East Kai: And so now...we'll have a big party! King Kai: Leave me alone! Grand Kai: An Other World Tournament. I think that's just a killer idea, West Kai. West Kai: Hah! Why, thank you sir. Grand Kai: And to make things excitin', I'll throw in a free private lesson to whomever brings home the gold, baby! West Kai: You mean...the winner of the tournament... East Kai: ...Gets a lesson... King Kai: ...From you!? Goku: Hey, that sure beats training for ten thousand years, doesn't it? East Kai: (to Goku) If I lose in a race against you, then I will approve your participation. West Kai: There she goes again... South Kai: Indeed. West Kai: We can't take her anywhere these days without her finding some excuse to go racing. Grand Kai: Lets see it. It's bound to be more interesting than watching you four bicker. Grand Kai: You both ran a very good race...but the winner is... East Kai: (thinking she has won) Oh, I knew it! Grand Kai: Myself! East Kai: What does that mean? Grand Kai: We all agree I got here first...and by the rules that means I win! East Kai: Yes, but...you didn't even tell me you were going to be a part of this race! Grand Kai: Well you didn't even bother to ask me! Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh ha ha ha ha ha ha! Other World Announcer: The winner will receive bragging rights, a gold medal, and...a special private lesson from the Grand Kai! Contestant: Can't the winner get a good pastry or somethin' else instead? (East Kai smacks the contestant in the back of his head) East Kai: Don't you be silly! West Kai: Hey, three of my fighters advanced. I'm incredible. King Kai: Yes, West Kai. Incredibly lucky. West Kai: I dare you to say that again! King Kai: Lucky! West Kai: Oh, your brain's slower than South Kai's fighters. South Kai: Guys, guys. Lets not argue. Lets make fun of East Kai. She only has one fighter! Maraikoh: Aha ha ha! Aha ha ha ha! Froug: You think being bigger than me is funny, huh? (Froug enlarges his entire body to an enormous size) You stopped laughing. Guess it's not so funny when you're the small one. East Kai: Not so cocky now, are you? Once Arqua is underwater, he is absolutely unbeatable. King Kai: But...that's just not fair! West Kai: Why? There's nothing in the rulebook against changing the ring into water. King Kai: There should be. King Kai: (Cheering for Olibu) Come on, Olibu! West Kai: Hey! North Kai! Why don't you just save your breath and cheer for someone good! There's no way he can beat Pikkon! King Kai: What!? Just wait and see, you fast talking half-pint! Olibu's gonna beat Pikkon without even trying! West Kai: Oh! Everyone look at North Kai! He's just told another corny joke and no one thinks it's funny! Grand Kai: (about fighting Pikkon) So, Goku...how do you feel? Goku: I'm trembling. It's just indescribable. West Kai: Trembling, huh? Well, of course you're scared...with you being a rookie and all. Goku: No, I'm trembling...'cause I'm excited! Mijorin: It's quite something. The darn newcomer has come this far. Warrior: Hmph. You know he won't make it through this bout. Mijorin: No, there's something about his energy. He may be the first person from the North Quadrant to earn the Grand Kai's lesson. Warrior: You're dreaming. Pikkon: He shows more strength with every fight. He's just playing with his opponents. (pause) I look forward to ending his game. King Kai: Wow. Maraikoh sure got his tail whooped. His coach must be a loser. Oh right, West Kai! He's from your Quadrant, huh? West Kai: He threw the fight. King Kai: Grr... West Kai: I told him to since it'd be kind of rude for both my fighters to be in the final round! King Kai: Wha...! West Kai: That's right, blue boy! So you better get all that stupid victory dancing out o' your system because there's no way Goku's gonna beat my Pikkon! King Kai: Can't you ever lose a match without giving some lame excuse! Goku's going to win this tournament and that's final! Pikkon: (to himself, about Goku, after watching Goku fight to finish eating his meat) He's either a fighting genius...or a total fool. Goku: (after Pikkon throws down his heavy clothes) Okay, I get it. You wear this heavy stuff to help you train. I should introduce you sometime to my friend Piccolo. Pikkon: Hm? Piccolo? Goku: Yeah, he wears weighted training clothes too. You guys would get along great. East Kai: Heavens, Grand Kai. You must be very excited to be giving your private lessons to either of these wonderfully skilled fighters. Grand Kai: (to himself) Oh, darn. I did make that little promise, didn't I? I was hopin' they wouldn't remember. Pikkon: I've never fought someone quite as powerful as you are. Goku: It's because you're strong. I find that my toughest opponents always bring out the best in me. Pikkon: Well, this should be exciting then, since I'm about to get much tougher. Goku: You got me. Pikkon: And I'll finish you...using the special attack you seem so fond of. Pikkon: (after Goku defeats Pikkon) You got me. Goku: Well, Pikkon...it was a mistake to use your thunder flash move a third time. By then I'd seen the attack enough times to find a weakness in it. Pikkon: Huh? Heh heh heh heh. I see. Truly, you're a great fighter. Enjoy your private lesson. I'll keep training and beat you at the very next chance. Goku: Great. Hey, thanks for fighting with me. Goku: We broke the rules so we lose. Hm. Grand Kai: But your fight rocked. So as a bonus, I'll allow both you and Pikkon to take my private lessons in two to three hundred years. Goku: Two hundred years. Great! I'll be there! Grand Kai: (to himself) That'd give me just enough time to whip back into shape. I've been too much of a couch potato to keep up with those boys now. Gohan: (to himself, while staring at a billboard of Hercule) Dad, you've got to see this. I know you'd have a good laugh. The whole world thinks Hercule was the one who beat Cell. And now, they've even named a city after him. Heh heh. Probably for the best. Goku and Gohan town would sound kind o' silly. Videl: Sharpner, don't tell me you're the Golden Fighter? Sharpner: Oh, spare me. I don't have time to play superhero. I spent all morning working out my arms. Gohan: The Gold Fighter? Is he a celebrity too...? Erasa: Where are you from? You're out of the gossip loop. He's a crimefighter with super strength and magic powers. They say he looks like a teenage boy except he has glowing golden hair. Everyone's talking about it. Gohan: (to himself) Uh oh. It's been five hours and they've already made a legend out of me. Gohan: (examining a study book in class) That's crazy. They even talk about Hercule in the grammar exercises. Teacher: (Gohan stands up in class) Excellent. A volunteer. Now, I haven't quite learned your name yet. Sharpner: This is Gohan, the perfect test score boy! Bulma: So basically, you don't want anyone to recognize you, right? Gohan: Yeah, that's right. I'm just scared my new friends will think I'm a little weird if they see me fighting criminals. Do you think you can help me, Bulma? Bulma: Well now, you could always not fight the bad guys, but I guess playing superhero is too much in your blood. Gohan: Good afternoon, Vegeta. Long time, no see. Vegeta: Hm. Well, well. Aren't you looking dull. A true warrior should be ready...even in times of peace. Gohan: Right... Student: They say he looks kind of funny but he's super strong. Yeah...uh...they call him the Great Singing Man. Gohan: Saiyaman! The Great Saiyaman! Sharpner: There's really no need to worry, Gohan. Videl can lift even more weights than I can. She's been training her whole life and some say she's as strong as her father now. Gohan: (to himself) As strong as her father? Oh. Well, I'm more worried she's as weak as her father. Passenger 1: (after a bus full of passengers is hijacked by criminals) Oh, this is all very exciting. Where do you suppose they'll be taking us? Passenger 2: Well, I don't have a clue. I've never been hijacked before. Passenger 3: This is much better than the normal tour. Gohan: (after posing in the Great Saiyaman outfit) Well, what did you think? Goten: Yeah! That was awesome. It sounded even better than the superheroes on TV. Can I be a superhero too? Chi-Chi: I think one superhero's enough for now. Gohan: (to himself, after Angela forces him to go on a date with her) How did I get myself into this predicament? Superheroes aren't supposed to get blackmailed, that just doesn't happen that way. What am I gonna do? Maybe I should have Bulma make me a different costume, just call myself something else. How could I do this to myself? I mean, I've never even been on a date. This is crazy. Chi-Chi: (to Gohan, about her date with Goku) Your father was such a rowdy boy. We spent the entire day fighting. What a great first date that was. Angela: Hey, Gohan. I need some sugar in my coffee. Ten teaspoons, please. Gohan: (Gohan pours the sugar for her) Nine...ten. Angela: Thanks. That's why I'm so sweet. Gohan: Oh man. That's a lot o' sugar. Angela: Were your pants down? Gohan: Ahh....! Videl: (to Gohan) I thought you were a nice boy. Keep your pants on, or else. Got it? Hercule: (about Great Saiyaman, after watching a program about him on TV) Fools. They call that runt a hero. Well I could break that little scrawny runt in two like a soggy toothpick. Videl: You're not gonna believe this, but I didn't jump in to help you because I thought you would be okay, because I honestly believed that you were the Great Saiyaman. Gohan: Me? No way... Videl: I was convinced of it until I saw you fight...eh. Please don't take on any more criminals, Gohan. Sorry, but you don't have what it takes. But you sure know how to take a punch in the face. Gohan: Gee, thanks. (to himself) Phew. Wow. I might have to get punched in the face more often. Jimbo: (about Gohan, after punching him in the face) Shoot. It's that little skinny kid that's unusual. Yeah, I think I busted my hand on his face. Slim Jim: What!? Jimbo: No joke. I felt like I was hitting a wall o' solid steel. Videl: I'm like a maid. I go wherever the filth is and I clean it up. My father's a busy man. If you wanna challenge him, you're gonna have to get through me first. Videl: (about Gohan) Darn him. Now where'd he go? I thought he was walking behind us. Erasa: He was... Sharpner: Look you two, when a geek disappears, you're not supposed to worry about it. It's a good thing. Videl: Gohan's not a geek. He's a heck of a lot cooler than you, Sharpner. Sharpner: What!? Videl: You heard me. Erasa: Yeah, and he's cuter too. Sharpner: Yeah, if you like your men scrawny and weak. Erasa: Videl doesn't need a strong man. She can kick your butt all by herself. Sharpner: No, she can't. Erasa: Yes, she can. Videl: Yes, I can. Sharpner: Whatever. Videl: You're a brilliant fighter dad. You can definitely win at the tournament again, but I heard that the guy who won before you is extremely powerful. Hercule: Ah, your dad knows all about the former champion. His name's Goku and he's a magician, not a fighter. Uses all kinds o' light tricks and deception to win his matches, see. And he doesn't have the brute strength that your father does Videl. He's a sissy compared to me and no one can defeat the man who saved the world! Ah! No one! Do you hear me, Goku? Aha ha! Gohan: Look, I know you kidnapped that little guy. Please let him go. Musuka: You gotta be kiddin' me. Don't you's remember how Jack in the beanstalk got the goose who laid the golden eggs? He stole her, that's how kid! But maybe you're right. Maybe all circus owners should be arrested for kidnapping! Ha ha ha ha! Aha ha ha! Gohan: It's not funny. Look, that dinosaur has a mother and a father and a home. You can't just take it, mister. Musuka: Grr...shut up! Where do you's think circus owners get their animals from, kid? Do you think the stork brings 'em! It's dollars that matter. Not sentimental rubbish. Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Officer: That girl has more power than all of us combined. Musuka: You's gotta be kiddin'. Officer: No, sir. Her name's Videl. Mister Satan's daughter. Musuka: You bonehead. Why didn't you say so? Yeah, it's her alright. Now there's someone who knows how to catch a thief. My tax dollars should be goin' to her instead o' you doughnut packin' monkeys! Videl: (to Great Saiyaman) Hey, guess what's gonna happen when they arrest you. The first thing they'll do is take that trash can off your head and reveal your true identity. Videl: Wow, this is gonna be great. What a terrific match. The former champion's daughter fighting the former champion's son. Doesn't that sound exciting to you? Gohan: No, not really. Why don't we do something really challenging like go out on a date? Bulma: So I heard that you're going to take part in the world martial arts championship. Gohan: Yeah. Bulma: Wow. Well, I must say I'm a little surprised, Gohan. It's not like you have to prove yourself or anything. Gohan: I know. But Videl Satan discovered my secret. She's blackmailing me into it. Bulma: Again? Good grief, Gohan. You get blackmailed more than a politician. What is it with you and all these girls? Gohan: (after wearing the new bandanna and glasses to go along with his Great Saiyaman outfit) Alright! I love it! Now that's what I call style! Hey, what do ya think, Trunks? Pretty cool, huh? Trunks: Yeah...it's great... (to himself) If you like looking like a total geek, that is... Vegeta: Even I'm excited, Kakarot...at having another chance to defeat you! Goku: Uhuh...we'll see. I guess anything's possible. Miracles do happen. Vegeta: Miracles, huh? Oh, I can't wait! Piccolo: I do have one question. You're not going to wear that in the tournament, are you? Gohan: What? Man, not you too! You don't think my outfit looks good? Piccolo: Hmm...Gohan, I can't lie to you. It's ridiculous. Goten: Gohan... Gohan: Hm? Goten: What's my dad like? Gohan: He's like an angel, Goten. Goten: What's an angel like? Gohan: I don't know. I just know that when they're around, you feel happy inside. Gohan: (while training for the upcoming martial arts tournament) Goten? Where'd you go? I guess I went too fast for the little guy. (hears Goten laughing) Hey, Goten! Where are you? Goten: (Goten is being licked by a baby dinosaur) Over here! I'm being attacked by a wild dinosaur! Please help me! Gohan, come over here and meet my new friend. He reminds me of Icarus. Hey! (the baby dinosaur pounces on Goten and continues to lick him) Gohan, help me! It tickles! Please! (laughs) Gohan: (thinking) Look at him. So simple and happy. Mom says that Dad was like that when he was a boy. Crazy little kid. (shouting) Hey, Goten! I'm gonna get started! I'll see you in a little bit! (flies off) Fortuneteller Baba: Goku's bored. He needs a challenge. Why don't you train him? Grand Kai: What? Goku? Train...? In...in his current current condition...I'm not sure his...uh...body could withstand the art of Grand Kai. Gohan: (after Goten fools around with a huge dinosaur) Do you know how mad mom would've been if I went home for dinner and I told her you were dead? Goten: Yes, sorry. Gosh. Chi-Chi: You're a Super Saiyan!? Goten: I am? Is that bad? Chi-Chi: Oh...not another monster in the family! Gohan: What's a matter Goten? Did mom give you a hard time when you transformed? Goten: Yeah, she said never do it again. I guess it's a bad thing because she called me a monster. Gohan: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Don't worry about it too much. You're the best little monster I know! Chi-Chi: My Gohan can't give you lessons. He's busy preparing himself for the world championships. Gohan: Mom...Videl's actually the one that talked me into taking part in the world championships. If it wasn't for her, I would have never even considered entering. Chi-Chi: Hmph. Well, alright then. Teach her. But let me give you some advice young lady! You keep your filthy hands off my son! Videl: Grr...hey! I've had enough of your trashy talk lady! Videl: Thank you very much for lunch, Chi-Chi. Chi-Chi: You're welcome. I'm just glad Gohan's making some nice lady friends. You know, it's never too early to settle down. Gohan: Mom...! Chi-Chi: (after Videl says her house has over fifty rooms in it) And you're planning to marry this girl? Goten: Hey! So, does this mean that Videl's gonna be my new sister? Gohan: I have no idea what you guys are talking about! South Kai: I have my own fighter. His name's Papoi. He saved the South Quadrant from something very nasty. King Kai: What? Like boredom? Vegeta: (after Trunks changes into a Super Saiyan in front of Vegeta) Did I miss something? When was it that the transformation to the legendary warrior of the Saiyan race was reduced to a child's plaything? Trunks: (after Vegeta asks Trunks to attack him but punches him down) You didn't say you would hit back, dad. Vegeta: Well, I didn't say I wouldn't hit you, now did I, Trunks? Videl: Dad doesn't even let me watch him train now. It's all a secret. Gohan: Ha ha ha ha ha. (to himself) Yeah, no wonder. He doesn't want Videl to know she's stronger than he is. Videl: Hey, daddy. Hercule: Oh, hello Videl. Videl: Shouldn't you be getting ready? Hercule: There's no need for it. They should probably just send the prize medal to my mailbox. Chi-Chi: Are you going to be competing too, Yamcha? Yamcha: Me? No. I'd just embarrass myself. I gave up fighting. Vegeta: (after he is told not to turn into a Super Saiyan in order to avoid the journalists) I don't see the problem. When the journalists come, I'll just destroy them! Bulma: Vegeta, would you behave yourself? Reporter 1: Mr. Satan, do you believe you'll have any competition? Hercule: Ha ha! Lets just say my chances of winning are about one hundred and twenty percent. Reporter 2: We've heard that your daughter is also taking part. Videl, what will you do if you have to fight your dad? Videl: Oh, I don't know. Guess I'll punch. Goku: Whoah, watch out everyone! Android 18 is here! Android 18: Look, he noticed. How cute. Goku: Someone please tell me she's still not terrorizing the planet. Krillin: Well, actually uh...Goku, 18 and I have gotten married. Goku: Uh...ah...you mean you live in the same house as her!? Krillin: What I wanna know is which one of us gets to fight Mister Satan. It sure would be nice to finally throw that goofball off his high horse. Gohan: Are all these people competing? Vegeta: I say we wipe them all out now. Announcer: But hey, tell me somethin'. It wasn't Mister Satan who beat Cell, right? Come on, I know it was you. Goku: Heh. Krillin: Hee hee hee hee hee. Announcer: Listen, I can't tell you how glad I am you're here. Without you, these last few tournaments have been nothing but capital B boring. (looks at Goku's team) Huh? Say, are all of them with you too? Goku: Yeah, you could say that. Announcer: Great, even better. So you think you guys can get through the fights without blowing up the ring this time? Piccolo: We'll try. Announcer: And that's exactly the kind of attitude this tournament has been lacking...ha ha. You haven't always had that gold ring over your head, have you? Goku: Well, actually...I've been dead ever since my fight with Cell but they let me come back this one time for a day to compete. Announcer: Uh...well that's weird. But hey, with all the things I've seen you do, it'd be dumb to start doubting you now. Am I right, Goku baby? Gohan: (to himself) Good. At least one person knows how great my dad is. Krillin: (after seeing people cheering for Hercule) Heh. People will cheer for a goldfish if you put a champion belt on 'im. Puppet Goku: (in a television program) Mister Satan is great. Puppet Vegeta: I wish I were him. Trunks: What you buyin' with the money? Goten: Aha ha ha. Toys, I guess. Trunks: You're such a toddler. Goten: What about you? Trunks: I'm not sure what I'm gonna buy. Goten: Yeah, I guess when your family's the richest in the world, there aren't many toys that you don't have. Krillin: (after seeing some kids fighting in the junior division matches) Boy. This is about as fun as watching wallpaper dry. Hercule: (to himself, after he picks up a disqualified kid and acts like a hero in front of the crowd) Tip one. For a successful image, look good with the kids. Yeah!!!! Android 18: What was that? Krillin: That's good marketing. The goof really knows how to milk a crowd. Krillin: (Trunks is about to fight) Do your best! Oh, wait. Trunks' best might hurt someone. Do okay! Announcer: (about Goten and Trunks) Outside of the ring of competition, these little guys are friends. They usually fight in the woods together but now they've moved to a different place! The world championship stage! Wow, that's amazing! Servant: (Hercule is sleeping) Sir, excuse me. Mister Satan, excuse me please, Mister Satan. Sir! Hercule: Uh! Servant: Sorry, I didn't know that you were sleeping. Hercule: Oh...I wasn't sleeping. Fooled you, huh? I was actually in a deep meditation. Even though I showed the outward signs of sleep, I could still sense you coming down the hall and entering my room. What do ya think of that? Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Trunks: Just to let you know, I am going to win. Understood? Goten: Yeah. I'm goin' for the win too. Gohan: Hey dad. Hey Krillin. We finally finished the qualifying test. Krillin: What took so long? Hm? Heh heh heh heh heh. Oh, I see. You were hanging out with your girlfriend. Gohan: Krillin! It's not like that. We're just friends. Krillin: Hee hee hee hee. Yeah right, whatever. Goku: Gohan, is that sunburn? Or are you blushing? Videl: My gosh! Goten and Trunks are more powerful than most of the adult fighters here! Goku: Those two are really tearing it up! They'll be stronger than us soon if we don't watch it! Gohan: I know. Goku: (after Trunks gets Goten in a stranglehold) Oh man! This does not look good! Vegeta: Sure it does. If you're rooting for Trunks, that is! Hercule: (after Goten turns into a Super Saiyan while fighting Trunks) How can this be? It's him! It's them! The ones with the powers! He's just like the guy who beat Cell! Goku: (after Trunks turns into a Super Saiyan and wins the tournament) Trunks too? You mean they're both Super Saiyans? Wow. What's up with this generation? Vegeta: Aha ha ha ha! Cheer up, Kakarot! There's always next year. Your son put up a good fight, but there can only be one champion. Trunks: (after Trunks wins and Goten complains) Come on, don't be mad at me. I'll tell you what. You can have three of my toys. You pick 'em. Goten: What!? Really? Cool! I get to pick. Wow. I know which ones, too. Thank you, Trunks. Goku: (Hercule is supposed to have an exhibition match against Trunks) Ha. This isn't going to be much of a fight, you know. Krillin: Right. You better not blink, or you'll miss it. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Vegeta: Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Trunks is going to pulverize this noisy fool! World Champion? I've known stronger house plants. Goten: Tear him apart Trunks. You can do it. Hercule: (afraid) Quiet there kid. Watch your mouth. Lets not encourage him too much, okay? Krillin: Man, Goku. You sure eat a lot for a dead guy! Goku: You know, that's exactly what King Kai always tells me. But what can I say? I just love to eat. Krillin: You're tellin' me. Gohan: It was pretty interesting. Trunks beat Mister Satan with one punch. Goku: Really? Gohan: But everyone thinks that he lost the match on purpose just to be a gentleman. Krillin: Hm. What a guy, huh? He should get an academy award for that one. Goku: (after he eats a lot) Wowee, I'm so full. If I have to fight one of you guys, please don't punch me in the gut! Gohan: (to Krillin) You didn't eat anything. You must be on a diet. Krillin: Believe it or not Gohan, most athletes don't like to stuff themselves before a big match. Android 18: Hey. We should go check the draw. See who's fighting who. Vegeta: Well, if I have to fight Kakarot in the first round, the first thing I'm going to do is punch him in the gut. Goku: Aw man. No mercy. Supreme Kai: Good afternoon. You wouldn't be Goku by any chance, would you? Goku: Yeah. How did you know my name was Goku? Supreme Kai: Well, your reputation as a great fighter precedes you. I was actually hoping for a chance to fight you during the tournament. Piccolo: (about Supreme Kai and Kibito) I sense something from them and I'm not sure what it is. They're very powerful but their power is...different. Videl: Huh? Why can't we trust them. They seem nice enough. Gohan: Uh...well sometimes, Piccolo is...a little on the paranoid side. Videl: I guess you're right. He does seem a little bit high strung. Krillin: (praying) Okay. I don't ask for much. Just please, please don't make me fight any of my friends. Piccolo: Krillin, destiny is not something that you can control. Krillin: Hey, it never hurts to try. (still praying) Especially not Goku. Goku: (Spopovich and Yamu are angry) Eh...I wonder what's making them so angry. Maybe they didn't have a good breakfast. Announcer: Is uh...Number 18 your real name? Android 18: My father was pretty dull... Announcer: Each match has a time limit of thirty minutes and not a second more. If there is not a victor decided within the allotted time, then that decision will be left up to the judges. Krillin: Uh...thirty minutes isn't long enough. Pintar: Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Thirty seconds is too long for you, tough guy. Krillin: Will you shut up. Erasa: Hey, there's the Great Saiyaman. Ooh, What if he and Videl have to fight? Just think, the city's two greatest crimefighters in the ring together. Isn't it exciting? Sharpner: Nah. Nobody with an outfit that stupid looking could be strong enough to get past the first round. Chi-Chi: I hate to be the one to break it to you, Bulma, but my Goku has never lost a fight. Bulma: Oh, so that's why he wears that halo? Goku: Break a leg, Krillin. Krillin: Just so long as it's not one of mine. Pintar: (to Krillin) I'm surprised that you stayed this long, little man. I was worried that I'd end up beating myself into a pulp, but now that you're here, I guess you'll do just fine. Ah, eh. You know, I asked my sister to call and reserve you a private room at the hospital. Ha ha ha. You'll thank me. Hee hee hee hee hee. Announcer: There's a lot o' talk down here on the floor about fairness in regards to the size difference of our competitors. Let me just say that this is a competition where size truly does not matter, folks. Pintar: You can believe what he's saying if you want to, but I tell you this...you're gonna definitely think size matters when I'm done with you. Krillin: (to himself) Heh. I'm gonna have to take it easy on this guy. I don't wanna cause him any more brain damage. Chi-Chi: Sounds like Gohan's girlfriend has quite a few fans up there. Bulma: Sure does. Yamcha: What? Gohan's girlfriend? Hah, that kid. He's a chip off the old block. Yup. Chi-Chi: Yeah. And did you know, Videl comes from a very wealthy family. She's a perfect match for Gohan. Bulma: Sure, if you overlook the fact that Mister Satan's her dad. Yamcha: Aha ha ha ha ha ha. Hey, Mister Satan is her dad? Well, that makes things interesting. Piccolo: Forgive me if I'm mistaken, but I have to ask you. Supreme Kai: Yes? Piccolo: Well, are you...are you the Grand Kai? Supreme Kai: Sorry, no I'm not. Kibito: I'll tell you who he is. The Supreme Kai. Goku: What's up Piccolo? What did that Shin guy say to you? Piccolo: Uh...! Goku: He wasn't rude was he? You want me to set him straight for ya? I bet if I told him you were once the guardian of Earth, he'd have a little more respect. Piccolo: Uh...no! Don't do that! Please! Don't do anything! Please don't! Chi-Chi: Videl will make a great wife for Gohan! Bulma: Yeah...and it looks like she won't have any problem keeping him in line. Chi-Chi: So you agree! I knew that you would. We have got to get those two married! Chi-Chi: (to Videl) Hey! Get up! Come on! I won't let you marry Gohan if you won't get up now! Bulma: I sure wouldn't want Chi-Chi as my mother-in-law, would you? Yamcha: Uh...no. Hercule: (to himself) You know, I probably shouldn't go all out in the first match. It'll make a better show if I save some of my special techniques for the final. It's never been easy controlling my incredible strength. Hmm, but it is my job to give the people what they paid for. Announcer: This is just terrible! Spopovich is using Videl as a punching bag! I don't know why he doesn't end this now! He's completely out of control! Chi-Chi: (Spopovich is crushing Videl's face into the ground) Ah! Please, somebody's got to do something! Videl will make the perfect wife for Gohan, but they'll never get together if she gets squashed like a bug! Yamu: (while Spopovich is crushing Videl) That's enough. Stop playing games, Spopovich. Spopovich: Huh? Yamu: Don't you remember that we have far more important things to do? Spopovich: Eh...uh... Yamu: Finish it...right now. (Spopovich kicks Videl out of the arena) Hercule: (about Gohan, while Videl is in a hospital bed) Oh no, Videl! Don't tell me that that kid is your boyfriend! Well I won't allow it, you hear me!? I don't approve of this! You know I've always said that if you have a boyfriend, that he must be strong like me! Not a feeble little twerp! How can he protect my little girl! Gohan: Krillin, I'm gonna go see Videl. Krillin: Sure. But what about your dad? Don't you wanna wait for him? He went to Korin's to get some senzu beans, remember? Gohan: Yeah, but how can I just stand around like this while I know Videl's in the hospital. There's gotta be some way I can help. Krillin: Good luck. Gohan: Huh? Krillin: Heh heh heh. You know what, it sounds to me like you and Videl are becoming more than just friends, huh? Korin: (Goku is eating a lot) I don't wanna rush you, Goku. But aren't you forgetting something? Don't they need you? Back on Earth? Goku: (eating) Yeah, I know. But it's just that they don't have good food like this at Grand Kai's place. This is delicious! Korin: Yes, but you came here for senzu beans, not to stuff your face... Yamu: (looking at Supreme Kai and Kibito) Spopovich...the one we're after may be one of them. Spopovich: Don't worry. We'll know soon enough with this. (holding kili meter) Yamu: We'll wait 'til the next match. Spopovich: Uhuh. Vegeta: (to himself, while staring at Goku) Heh. Look at Kakarot, checking out his competition. He's wasting his time. I'm the one he should be worrying about. Vegeta: (to Supreme Kai) I don't know you, and you're telling me what to do? Who do you think you are? Piccolo: Vegeta, show him some respect. That is no way to be talking to the Supreme Kai. Krillin: Eh! Vegeta: Uh! Goku: Ah! I heard stories from King Kai but I thought they were just stories. Shin? You're the Supreme Kai!? Vegeta: (after Gohan changes into a Super Saiyan in front of Kibito) Ha! Gohan had a lot more power when he fought Cell. I think your son has gone soft in these peaceful times, Kakarot. Supreme Kai: You may be right, but he is still the strongest fighter at this tournament. The only question is, will it be enough...? Spopovich: (after Spopovich and Yamu drain Gohan's energy) Aha ha ha ha. That was easier than we thought. Aha ha ha. Krillin: (to Goku) I can't say that I like it, but if you're going, then I'm going too. Though I know I'm gonna regret this. Vegeta: I know what you're doing, Kakarot! You're trying to skip out on our next match, aren't you? Goku: Vegeta, can't you see that there's something more important going on here? Vegeta: (Vegeta grabs Goku) You listen! After the next two matches, we are scheduled to fight! And you will fight me! So if you leave, you had better make sure you come back! I only entered this stupid tournament so I could beat you! Goku: Okay, okay. Take it easy, Vegeta. I have to go with the Supreme Kai but I promise I'll put you at the top of my things to-do list when I get back. Just try and relax, will ya? Vegeta: Ohh! You forget, you can only stay for one day in this world! Goku: I guess that slipped my mind, but listen, why don't you come with me? Piccolo: We're wasting time here. Yamu: Majin Buu will be resurrected with this power. Babidi will be very pleased with us. Spopovich: Uhuh. Goku: So I guess Bibidi's son is controlling the guys from the tournament? Supreme Kai: Yes. His name is Babidi. And as is often the case in this universe, the son is as evil as the father. Krillin: Great. Why does that not surprise me? Kibito: Dabura! Supreme Kai: What is he doing here!? Kibito: That cursed wizard. He's even managed to ensnare the king of the demons! Krillin: Uh!? Goku: Which one? Which one is Dabura? Supreme Kai: The tall one. Goku: I see. Is he strong? Supreme Kai: Of course he's strong! He is the king of the demon world. Gohan: Wait a second. What is this demon world? Supreme Kai: It is a shadow world that exists on the other side of this one. Like two sides of the same coin. One of you may be the strongest in this world. But in his dark demon world, Dabura is the strongest by far. Krillin: (afraid) Uh, guys, I'm beginning to feel just a little bit outclassed here. Uh...uh...I mean I'll still help you out if you think you need me...but why don't I...uh...how 'bout I take the little guy...? Kibito: Once Babidi infiltrates a person's heart, his influence is complete. All he needs is to find but a trace of evil to bring someone under his power. Only those pure of heart and free of evil desires like us have a chance of fighting him successfully. Krillin: Well, that works for most of us. But what about Piccolo? He hasn't always been one good guys, you know. Piccolo: This is not the time! Supreme Kai: I never anticipated that Dabura would be here too. I'm afraid that this changes everything. Vegeta: Surely, the Supreme Kai isn't afraid, is he!? Supreme Kai: Hmmm... Vegeta: Hmph! Fine! You can cower up here behind the rocks if you want! I'll take them on myself if you don't have the stomach for it. Krillin: I may just let you do that, Vegeta! Babidi: You've done well. We are now one step closer to achieving our goal. Spopovich: When you're as strong as us, this kind of job is like taking baby from a candy! Babidi: It's such a shame that your business with me is finished. Spopovich: Huh!? Babidi: I'm afraid I have no more use for you. Ha ha ha ha! (Babidi does his wizard magic to Spopovich) Spopovich: Uh? Waaahhhh!!! Babidi: Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. (Spopovich's entire body begins to bulge and he explodes to death) Yamu: Uh!? Babidi: Too bad. You know, I really liked him too. Pui Pui: Yes. A terrible loss. Dabura: Now for our other friend... Yamu: Uh! Au...! (Yamu flies off with fear) Babidi: Pui Pui. Would you please kill him? Pui Pui: Gladly. (Pui Pui blasts Yamu in the sky, killing him) Babidi: Ah. Nice shot. Babidi: Oh, there's something else. Dabura: Yes? Babidi: It would seem we have some company. Yamu and Spopovich were a bit careless in their escape I'm afaid. Dabura:  Eheh heh... Babidi: Above us on that cliff face, you will find Supreme Kai and several of his friends. Pui Pui: Uh...huh...uh...? Dabura: Heh heh heh heh heh. The fools believe they are well hidden. Seven in all. Each of them strong. We cannot use the energy of the Supreme Kai or Kibito, but three of these others possess enormous energy as well. It would go a long way toward reviving Majin Buu. Babidi: Oh, more than that Dabura. In these three alone, we will find more than enough energy to suit our purposes, how marvelous! Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh! I never imagined we would accomplish our goal so quickly! Lets lure those three into the ship where we could absorb their energy. That would be the simplest course of action, don't you think? Dabura: Yes. But the Supreme Kai will surely try to prevent it. Babidi: Oh, I think we can manage to get around that little problem. Dispose of the stragglers and get back to the ship at once. The others will come storming after you in a rage. Dabura: Very nice. I need but a moment, and you will have them. Babidi: Good, good. But spare the Supreme Kai for now. For what he did to my father, I will take my own sweet time with his destruction. Dabura: At your request, master. I will leave him for your pleasure. Babidi: Shall we get to work then? Dabura: Certainly. Babidi: Aha. Aha. Ha. Here they come. I'd be shocked if any one of them had a brain! Ha ha ha ha! Dabura: Ha ha ha ha! Trapped so easily. Pui Pui: Master Babidi. Has the time come? Babidi: Oh, my dear Pui Pui. Pui Pui: Please. I'm becoming quite anxious. Babidi: Then...lets put that to good use. Go see our guests and don't leave a drop of their energy behind. Pui Pui: Yes. Not a drop. Pui Pui: You need not concern yourselves with getting to stage two, because unfortunately for you, the first warrior you must face is none other than me. And that means that none of you will make it out of here alive! Ha ha ha! Ha ha! Ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha! Ha ha ha! Goku: Alright guys. So which one of us gets to fight first? Pui Pui: Huh? Vegeta: (after Goku, Vegeta, and Gohan play rock, paper, scissors to see who fights Pui Pui and Vegeta wins) Ha ha ha. Scissors win. Goku: Oh...I wanted to fight this guy! Vegeta: Well, sorry you won't get your chance! Supreme Kai: Wait, please! You don't really intend to fight him by yourself, do you? Vegeta: Of course I do! What other way is there? Pui Pui: Ah! Heh Heh heh heh heh ha ha ha! Master Babidi told me to be very careful because your high energy makes you strong and dangerous. But you're nothing but a bunch of morons! Vegeta: The only moron in this place is Babidi! He didn't investigate this planet very thoroughly, did he? If he had, he'd know that the most powerful fighter alive is standing in front of you! Pui Pui: You!? The most powerful fighter alive? Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha! That kind of arrogance would get you killed! Supreme Kai: Don't underestimate him. Babidi uses his magic to attract the strongest warriors in the universe. Goku: Hey, calm down. Lets just let Vegeta take it from here, okay? Supreme Kai: Huh? Are you sure? Pui Pui: You know, none of you will ever leave here. And every ounce of energy you lose as I pound you will be absorbed by this room. And as the energy is absorbed, it will be channeled directly to Majin Buu. Vegeta: Well, I guess that's unfortunate then...since you won't be able to hurt me, you won't be able to steal my energy. Pui Pui: Keep dreaming. Before I'm done, I'll do much more than hurt you. When you fight Pui Pui, death is a certainty! Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Vegeta: This guy is really annoying. (to Pui Pui) Welcome to the end of your life. And I promise, it's going to hurt! Pui Pui: Grr... Vegeta: Ready for the pain? Pui Pui: Eheh heh heh heh heh! Welcome...to my home planet! I've won many great battles here, and by now, you've noticed that my planet is very different from yours. (Pui Pui picks up a stone) It's the gravity. Ten times stronger than Earth! Your hopes of winning are falling faster than that stone! You won't leave here alive! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Huh? Vegeta: Maybe if this was five hundred times gravity you might have an advantage. But ten? I don't even feel it. Pui Pui: Huh!? You're just bluffing! I know you are! Vegeta: Maybe I am. Hard to tell. Pui Pui: Enough! (Pui Pui attacks Vegeta with a succession of kicks and punches, but Vegeta dodges everything, slams his fist into Pui Pui's gut and kicks him into the debris) Uh? Vegeta: So do you still think I'm bluffing? Pui Pui: Grr...grr... Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Pui Pui: Yah!!!! (Pui Pui still angrily runs at Vegeta) Vegeta: Heh heh heh heh. (Vegeta quickly ducks below Pui Pui, placing his arms on his chest and blasting him to death) Pui Pui: Ahhhh!!!! Vegeta: (about Goku and Gohan) Children. So easily amused. Dabura: Babidi, who are you going to appoint to defend stage two? Babidi: Hmmm...send Yakon. Dabura: What? This situation hardly calls for such extreme measures. Babidi: I believe we may have underestimated the strength of those three. You see, Pui Pui was defeated easily without inflicting any damage to that fighter at all. Dabura: Of course. But if Yakon fights now, I'm certain he will finish everyone off, and there won't be anyone left for me. Babidi: We're not here to have fun. We're here to free Majin Buu and destroy planet Earth. Got it? Understand? Dabura: Yes, of course. Forgive me. Babidi: Yakon. Sorry to keep you waiting my friend. I have some fresh victims for you. Have as many as you like. Yakon: Yes Babidi. Vegeta: I'm beginning to think that this Majin Buu may not be worth fighting after all. And the same goes for that Dabura. Goku: Why'd I have to get this guy? Sure, he's big. But he kinda looks dumb ta me. Yakon: Huh? Supreme Kai: I know that monster. I know who he is. His name is Yakon. Gohan: You've met him before? Supreme Kai: That's right. He is one of the most feared creatures in the universe and he is extremely strong. I don't think Goku will be able to beat him on his own. Yakon: (to Goku) Welcome to the planet of darkness. You're scratching your head, aren't you? You can't see me but I can see you. Babidi: (after Goku changes to a Super Saiyan) What is that guy up to? He looks different than before. Oh no! He...he...he's changing. Dabura: So what? He's just emitting light. Babidi: I don't believe this! Three thousand kilis! How can an Earthling generate three thousand kilis of energy!? Dabura: It can't be! With three hundred kilis, it's possible to destroy a planet! Three thousand!? I tell you a human with that much power does not exist. Dabura: Master, don't worry. He's mine now. I'll take care of everything. Babidi: Uh!? Dabura: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! For stage three, I will be the warrior they must battle! And you have my word that I will fill Majin Buu with their energy when I destroy every one of them! Babidi: But Dabura...if you are beaten by them, then who will protect me? You must promise me that you'll win! Dabura: I'll win. I am Dabura. I am the demon king! I don't care how many kilis of energy they have. There is no one in the universe who can exceed my power! Supreme Kai: Goku, listen to me! This is not a game! Babidi's henchmen come from the four corners of the universe and every one of them is incredibly strong! We've all been lucky so far, but I think from now on, we should all fight together. Goku: Nah. Don't you worry about it, Supreme Kai. Gohan doesn't need any help. Besides, that would be unfair. Supreme Kai: Huh? Unfair!? Goku: Well, Vegeta and I both got to fight alone. So don't you think Gohan should have a turn for himself, too? Babidi: (about Dabura) I'm glad he's taking this seriously. He can be such a devil! Heh heh! Oh, I just can't wait to see the look on all of their faces when Dabura walks through the door. Goku: So I uh...wonder how they're doin' back at the World Martial Arts Tournament...? Gohan: I don't know, dad. I mean, we did sorta leave 'em in a bit of a bind. Vegeta: I would've preferred to fight you there Kakarot...than come to this place. This has been a waste of my time battling these cretins! Gohan: Heh heh. I know what you mean, Vegeta. I was looking forward to dukin' it out in the ring with my dad, too. Goku: Oh, yeah! I'm ready for the both of you! Anytime! Anywhere! Supreme Kai: (to himself) These Saiyans are impossible. They enjoy the thrill of a challenge so much that they ignore the dangers of fighting. Reckless! Trunks: (about Hercule) That old guy's a clown, isn't he? Goten: No! Clowns are funny! Coordinator: Mister Satan, it looks like your battle royale idea is a hit. It was very courageous of you to suggest it. Hercule Satan: Uh...what? Coordinator: Well, yes of course. Defending your title against four challengers at once is no easy feat. To be honest, if you were anyone else, I'd say you were a fool. Hercule Satan: Ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha! The last thing a champion like me ever worries about is the competition. Ha ha. Coordinator: Yes, of course. Everyone knows that you're the best fighter on planet Earth. Right, he's great. Hercule Satan: (to himself) I'm done for. Vegeta: Where are they!? Sleeping!? Gohan: After those moves you and dad showed off at the last two stages, you probably scared them off. Goku: I hope they don't all run away. You haven't even had your turn. Trunks: (while they are disguised as Mighty Mask and are fighting Android 18) I'll tell you what! If you land a kick, I'll buy you an extra toy or something with the prize money. Goten: Oh, really! Alright! Hercule Satan: (to himself) What was I thinking? Hey lets do a battle royale. Why couldn't I just keep my big mouth shut! Babidi: (to himself) Dabura's going to rid me of those annoying intruders, but first I must have their energy so I can feed it to Majin Buu. He's the perfect choice to handle all the dirty work. After all, he's had so much experience at it. And the more he concentrates his evil spirit in that meditation room, the easier it will be for me to manipulate him. Announcer: It's hard to think of this as a battle royale anymore. It has now become an all-out war between Mighty Mask and Number 18. Hercule Satan: But...what about me? Hercule Satan: (after Android 18 kicks him once) But...you said you were gonna lose on purpose. Android 18: I'm going to...but we have to make it look good for the fans, don't we? Besides, what was it you called me...an amateur? Hercule Satan: Sorry. I was just trying to act like myself. Android 18: (after allowing Hercule to win the match so he can pay her double the prize money later) Good match. I'll be paying your house a little visit tomorrow. If you don't pay, I'm going to kill you, champ. Hercule Satan: Yes...I uh...the champ understands. Gohan: Man, this is kinda like bein' on a game show or somethin'. Heh. I wonder who's gonna be behind door number three. Vegeta: Gohan's been far too busy going to school and going out on dates to do any serious training! Both of us are more powerful than he is in his condition. Of course I could be wrong. Maybe he's been training in between classes or during P.E. or something. Maybe he's the strongest one here. Gohan: Well...eheh heh eheh. Vegeta: I didn't think so... Dabura: I must say I'm impressed. Beating Yakon and advancing to stage three is far beyond what any other mortal has managed to do. Yes, it was quite unexpected indeed. So now you must face me...which means, you will progress no further. Vegeta: Hmph. Your boss must be nervous if he sent out his number one guy. Why doesn't he come out himself, huh? He too scared? Dabura: (to Gohan) You want a glimpse of my true power? Well, so be it. I didn't know you were in such a hurry to die. Dabura: (to Gohan) Is that all the power your transformation yields? You're pathetic. Supreme Kai: Dabura is far stronger than Yakon and Pui Pui. Goku: That's okay. So's Gohan. Vegeta: I can't take this anymore! This is ridiculous! Why are we subjecting ourselves to this! Look! Call him down, Kakarot! I'll finish this! Goku: Just give him a little more time. It's not like he's completely lost yet. Why not let him fight? He's hangin' in there. Vegeta: Dabura's toying with him. You know that! Come on! Dabura: Hmmm? Vegeta: Why should I sit around all day acting like this matters. I could end this in five minutes if I wanted to! I'm not here to play games, Kakarot! Or to create nice father-son memories! I'm here to win! Stop pretending! Knock off the sentimental rubbish! The strongest one is the one who should do the job! I'm the one who should be fighting, not him! Gohan: Hey! Where do you think you're going? Are you giving up or what? Dabura: Oh no. It's just a brief intermission. We just need a few minutes to rework our strategy. It seems we've found a new recruit. The perfect warrior, capable of handling all of you. So just take a little rest while we bring him up to speed. Heh heh heh heh heh heh ha ha ha ha ha ha! Gohan: Hey! Come back! Supreme Kai: (to himself) What are they up to? They don't have any warriors stronger than Dabura! Babidi: Did you really make a discovery? Hmm? Dabura: Eheh heh heh heh heh. Yes. Babidi: Good. I was beginning to think that you'd lost your nerve and were just looking for an excuse to get away. But I guess I was wrong, wasn't I? Dabura: The demon king fears no mortal, although I admit they were stronger than I thought. Vegeta: Nah! This whole thing would be over with right now if it wasn't for you! I hope you're proud of yourself! Gohan: What do you mean? Vegeta: I mean you've disgraced us with your pitiful performance. There's no excuse for you fighting the way you did. You have Saiyan blood running through your veins. A warrior like Dabura should be dead! And now you're sitting here scratching your head, wondering what's next when this should already be finished. You are pitiful. Fighting with that soft righteous look on your face. It's brute strength that determines the outcome of a battle, not goodness. The mightiest survive and the weak perish. Your Piccolo and Krillin were turned to stone. Gohan: Uh!? Vegeta: That's because they're weaklings. Is that the kind of fate you want for yourself!? Uh! Garden statues! If they're lucky, someone will make a birdbath out of them! Supreme Kai: You don't know Buu! His power is horrible! He's pure evil! Not even the four Kais combined could stop him! He's murdered millions of innocent people! Vegeta: Shut up! Supreme Kai: Don't be a fool! If Buu's revived, this planet's finished. History! All living things will be exterminated! He'll turn the Earth into a dark lifeless tomb. Vegeta: Enough! Now you listen to me! What happens to this planet is none of my concern. The strongest will find a way to survive and the weaklings shall perish! Supreme Kai: What kind of person are you? Supreme Kai: Don't let him take you, Vegeta! Let go! The past is the past! Don't think of it! Be innocent and clear! Vegeta: How can you say that!? I'm not innocent! Chi-Chi: Hey wait! Maybe they could still win some money if they knocked Mister Satan out in front of all these people! Yamcha: It doesn't work that way. Chi-Chi: Hush up! Goku and Gohan beat Cell and that bum got rich off it! Now tell me...is that fair!? Yamcha: No. But that's the way it goes Chi-Chi. Goku: (to Majin Vegeta, after he blasts through the world tournament arena, killing many) Shame on you. The Vegeta I know would never have done this. Hercule Satan: Hey, maniac! I'm afraid I can't allow you to move another inch! Your crimespree will end at my glorious fists. You've come head to head with the champion of the world, big guy! Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Hercule Satan: Hey! Why are you laughing? Vegeta: You'll fight with me, Kakarot! Unless of course, you'd like more bodies to pile up on your conscience. Goku: Uh! Vegeta! Certainly you didn't! Vegeta: Ha ha ha ha... Goku: How sad. I didn't think you were weak enough to be controlled. Gohan: Uh!? Supreme Kai: Huh!? Gohan: Dad, don't. Goku: Answer me! Vegeta! Do you let yourself be a slave!? (Vegeta raises his hand to the side and blasts the world tournament arena again, killing more bystanders) Huh!? Ahh! Vegeta: Tell me. Is it slavery when you get what you want!? (Vegeta smiles) Heh heh heh heh heh heh. Heh heh. Goku: Grr...grr...grr...grr...grr...grr...grr... Gohan: Stop it! You don't know what you're doing! Vegeta: Grr! Stand aside! (Vegeta knocks Gohan away with a flick of his hand) This does not concern you! It's between me and your circus clown of a father! Goku: Circus clown. Well, that's a new one. Vegeta: Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh! (Goku powers up) Supreme Kai: No, Goku! You mustn't! If you fight him here, you would be doing precisely what Babidi wishes. Every injury that Vegeta causes would be sent back to the ship and Buu will be revived! Goku: Tell me Vegeta. With that stamp on your head, I know Babidi's been giving you orders. Is this one of them? Are you trying to fight me because of him, or is this the same old story between you and me? Which one? Gohan: Does it really matter!? Vegeta: Not to you, Gohan. But to a warrior, it matters greatly. And you know this as well as I do, Kakarot. In a day, you'll be back to the dead, and I will not miss this opportunity! Supreme Kai: Who are you people!? Don't you see the universe matters more than your meaningless squabble? Vegeta: Grrr...grrr...meaningless, huh? Supreme Kai: Uh!? Vegeta: What do you know of meaningless!? Argh! Spend most of your life ruled by another, watch your race dwindle to a handful...and then tell me what has more meaning than your own strength! I have in me the blood of a Saiyan prince. He is nothing but a joke! Yet, I've had to watch him surpass me in strength...my destiny thrown to the wayside! He's...he's even saved my life as if I were a helpless child. He has stolen my honor. And his debts...must be paid! Babidi: (about Supreme Kai) You can't afford to let him live, Vegeta. Kill him, Vegeta! Kill him! Vegeta: I refuse. Babidi: What!? Dabura: Huh!? Vegeta: Your business with the Kai...it means nothing to me! Kakarot is my only objective. Vegeta: (to Babidi) No! Get out of my head! I already told you! I will not be distracted from this anymore! I won't! It will take more than head games to stop me! You may have invaded my mind and my body, but there's one thing a Saiyan always keeps...his pride!!! Goku: Wow, Vegeta. This might take longer than I thought. Vegeta: You see!? This is our fate! Our battle! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Babidi: The only thing we have to do now is decide how we're going to exterminate the Supreme Kai...that rat! Dabura: Yes, Master. Babidi: Eheh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Oh, what a happy day! I haven't laughed this much in years! Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Dabura: Leave them to me, Master. And I will have the Kai groveling at your feet before he dies. Babidi: I could just sing. Goku: (to himself, about Vegeta) Don't know why I'm surprised. He has been training for the last seven years straight. Babidi: Welcome, friends. Heh heh. I'm glad you could join us. Heh heh heh heh heh. Especially you, Supreme Kai. Supreme Kai: We've come to stop you, Babidi. Babidi: Like you did my father? Supreme Kai: I will not let you resurrect Majin Buu. Babidi: That's too bad. I'm sure Dabura won't like that one bit. He was so looking forward to meeting Buu today and you know, I really hate to see him upset. Supreme Kai: Wizard. You need not worry what your monster will do to you, not when you still have me to contend with. Babidi: Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Squeek, squeek. He's a noisy little rat, isn't he? Dabura: (to Babidi) Rest assured, these two will be easily removed from your sight. They're rubbish. I'll clean them up easily. Heh heh heh heh heh heh. Babidi: Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Good, you can dispose of them any way you like. Maybe you could even turn them into stone. Two more statues to add to our collection. Dabura: No, I have something far more painful in mind. Babidi: Did I mention how glad I am to see you, Kai? Now I can finally avenge my father, can't I!? You remember don't you, the way you murdered my father!? I suppose he let his guard down! I won't make that mistake! I won't be done in like my father was, especially not by you! I learned from his shortcomings! I made his weaknesses my strengths! For example, I've learned to keep better company. Father never did have a knack for spotting talent. Goku: Vegeta, I don't understand. You've never allowed anyone to help you before in your life. Why start now? Why Babidi? Vegeta: Because I wanted him to reawaken the evil in my heart. I wanted him to return me to the way I was before! I was the perfect warrior! Cold and ruthless! I lived by my strength alone, uninhibited by foolish emotion! But slowly...over the years...I became one of you, my quest for greatness gradually giving way to this life of mediocrity. I awoke one day to find that I had settled down, formed a family...I had even grown quite fond of them. Would you believe, I almost started to think the Earth was a nice place to live...? Do you understand now, Kakarot? That's why I needed Babidi to set me free. By releasing the evil in my heart, he has freed me of these petty attachments...and I'd have to say, it feels pretty good. Goku: Do you really believe what you're saying? Dabura: At last success, Master Babidi. Babidi: Ah! Yes! Sweet beautiful success! He's gonna come out! Majin Buu is coming out! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Supreme Kai: This is a time for strategy, Gohan! Not blind heroics. We must regroup and wait for a better opportunity! We have to wait! Supreme Kai: All your efforts for nothing! Babidi: Ah...ah...ah!? Supreme Kai: You've made a fatal mistake, Babidi! Just like your father! Fooled by overconfidence! Underestimated your opponents! And so this Earthling has destroyed your sacred Buu! Years of captivity in that shell must have made him defenseless! And not even the energy from this planet could revive him! Now the story of Buu finally comes to an end! Babidi: Eh...ah...uh...uh...uh!? Dabura: Don't let that old fool discourage you, Babidi. Even without Buu, we can still continue our plan. And I'm sure that with a little persuasion, the Saiyan prince could be put more completely under your control. Babidi: (while crying) Oh, it's no use! Don't you understand!? There isn't any plan without Buu! Supreme Kai: (laughing) To think I'd see the great wizard of evil brought to tears! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Babidi: Grr! Well, galactic domination may be ruled out, but what do you say we get rid of this annoying Supreme Kai! Dabura: Sure. Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Dabura: (watching the pink smoke of Buu forming in the sky) Clouds. No, it's some kind of smoke. I can't feel anything from it but...emptiness. Gohan: So, what's the verdict, Supreme Kai? Is this the guy you're so afraid of? Supreme Kai: Yes. That's Bibidi's creation without a doubt. I can never forget that disgusting creature's face! Supreme Kai: I can't bear to look at him! We have to retreat! Gohan: I'm not so sure about that. You may have been right about him weakening from his years in captivity. He's obviously tough, but I don't think he's unbeatable. Supreme Kai: Wha...? But don't you sense his power? His strength!? Gohan: Yeah, but I'm also well aware of what I can do. Vegeta: It's as I thought. There's nothing to worry about Kakarot. This Majin Buu has been revealed as a weakling! At least by the measuring bar you and I have set. Is it too hard to understand, clown? The Saiyan race has evolved since that creature was entrapped. Think of what the Supreme Kai said. He's been constantly surprised by our strength. On Babidi's ship, we conquered what were supposed to be the strongest fighters in the universe, and we barely broke a sweat! Think about it Kakarot! We Saiyans have taken a ruling place in the universe that even its greatest overseer couldn't predict. And Majin Buu may have ruled in his time but now he's sorely outclassed. Goku: You're wrong. I can feel something deeper inside him. Vegeta: Enough with your feelings! You're just stalling because you know I'm going to beat you! Goku: No, Vegeta. I know you can sense the same thing. You're just too proud to admit it. Dabura: (about Majin Buu) He is but a fool. Dabura: It is difficult to say why, but his revival has clearly been incomplete. I had great hopes for this Majin Buu, but this deformed version is nothing but an idiot and a waste. Hmm? (to Majin Buu) Oh, what's wrong? Do you have a problem with what I've said? Majin Buu: Buuuu! Pow pow pow! Ow ow ow ow! Pow pow pow pow pow! Dabura: A pity. He's not aware enough to know he's outmatched. Run along Buu. Or shall I turn you into stone? Goku: We don't have any time for this now, Vegeta! We're the ones who let Buu out of his shell! It's because of us! Vegeta: Buu is just a sideshow. You are my only concern! Goku: Everyone on Earth will be killed! You hear me!? Bulma! Trunks! Everyone! Vegeta: Grr...grr...shut up!!! Shut up!!! (Vegeta punches Goku repeatedly while speaking) Remember I've sold my soul to Babidi! I keep no loyalties! I have a Saiyan heart that depends on strength alone! They're nothing to me! Goku: Liar! Vegeta: Uh!? Goku: I don't buy it! (Goku smashes Vegeta to the ground) Talk all you want, Vegeta. But you better convince yourself of it first! Vegeta: (after hitting Goku from behind and knocking him out) I'll take care of this Buu myself! The last thing I need is for this clown to play hero again and dangle it over my head. We'll finish this fight when I return, Kakarot. Enjoy your sleep. And should your time run out before I'm done...heh heh...then we'll have to continue this another day...when I see you in hell! Majin Buu: Buuuu! Supreme Kai: You'll stop this! Majin Buu: No stop! Supreme Kai: Grr...grr...grr... Majin Buu: No stop! No stop! No stop! No no no no no! Babidi: (to Supreme Kai, who is wounded and lying on the ground) What a wonderful day this is! Though I fully plan to rip you into pieces, let me first say thank you. After all, if it weren't for all the incredibly strong fighters you brought me, I wouldn't have been able to bring Majin Buu back to life. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Normally, I'd let one of my slaves do the dirty work, but to show you my appreciation, I think I'll kill you myself. See what a marvelous circle this is? You killed my father and now I kill you! (Supreme Kai twitches) Huh? Eh, forget the circle. Hey Buu, what do ya say you finish off this rat for me like you were supposed to do in the first place! Buu! I'm ordering! Majin Buu: Ooo! Ordering! Babidi: Huh!? Majin Buu: I have hungry now. Buu eat him now, yes? Babidi: Huh!? Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! That's just terrific! Eating him up! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Ha ha ha ha ha ha! What an appropriate end! Lost in your belly! Yes! What are you waiting for, Buu!? Eat every single bit of him! Don't even let a strand of his hair escape your gorgeous stomach. Babidi: (after Dabura throws a spear through Majin Buu) Dabura! Have you gone absolutely insane over there!? I just really hope for your sake that you are aiming that spear at the Kai! Dabura: Babidi. Don't be such a fool. This Majin Buu creature is far too powerful to be kept under your control for long. If he's allowed to keep reaching into his power, it will only be a matter of time before he destroys you! Babidi: Grr...grr...grr... Dabura: Make the best decision of your life and help me crush him while we can! Babidi: Dabura, Dabura, Dabura, Dabura, are you crazy!? Dabura: Huh!? Babidi: There is no us anymore! Don't you understand!? He's been my life ambition and now that he's here, you are nothing! Dabura: Master Babidi... Majin Buu: (to Dabura) Now new plan. Now I eat you! Majin Buu: Me eat you up! Dabura: Ah! You wouldn't dare! Babidi: Did you enjoy your snack, Majin Buu? Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! You can eat the Supreme Kai too if you like. Majin Buu: (to Supreme Kai, who is bruised and lying on the ground) What should me turn you into? Chocolate or jelly? Majin Buu: (after Vegeta calls him ugly) He say oogly? What means that, oogly? Babidi: Grr...he means your face would frighten small children. Now be quiet! Vegeta: (to himself) Why is it that Kakarot haunts me so? Is it because he's always been one step ahead of me? Always succeeded where I have failed? First it was Frieza...defeating the tyrant that had held me in bondage my whole life...and then there was Cell...noble Kakarot...giving his life for the lives of his friends...for my life. Well no more. After all we've been through, it's finally my turn. I'll settle this so we can both rest in peace. Kakarot, when you wake up, this will all be over. I may be gone, but this planet will be safe. I'll stake my life on it. Babidi: Majin Buu! Don't let him do this to you! Just eat him or squash him or something! Babidi: Oh, yes! Victory! Aha ha ha ha! Go, Majin Buu! Pow pow pow! Ow ow ow! Isn't that right, Buu!? Drop him dead! Or whatever it is you say! Majin Buu: Me mad now! Vegeta: Uh!? Majin Buu: Me get big now! (Buu explodes with anger) Babidi: (about Vegeta) That fool thought he was so tough! But just look at him now! He's nothing compared to you, Majin Buu. He's nothing at all. Too bad he had to go and disobey me. He would've made such a fine subordinate. Majin Buu: You no fun. You go bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye bye! Vegeta: (to himself) I have to try harder. He must have a weakness. If this thing can be given life, he can also have it taken away. Babidi: Hah! So he's alive. That poor fool. It would've been a lot less painful for him if he had just rolled over and died. My Majin Buu is invincible. And now he's going to eat them all up! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Piccolo: That's not gonna happen. What you and that monster have done is unforgivable! Babidi: Huh? Who are you? Heh...my what a lovely shade of green you are. Looking good. Who could blame you. After all, you've seen the power of Majin Buu. It figures you'd turn green with envy. Piccolo: No. I always looked this way. So there's no use in flattering yourself, Babidi. Babidi: What? How dare you? You've got some nerve talking to me like that, you insect! Yes, you'd better watch yourself or I'll sic Majin Buu on you next. Piccolo: Yeah, why don't you call him wizard? I'm sure he'd be glad to see you writhing in agony like the worm you are. Babidi: What!? Oh! That does it! You're going to regret every word of that, you! Piccolo: Call your monster...so he can watch you die! Vegeta: Trunks, you are my only son and yet I haven't held you once since you were a baby, have I? Come here, son. Trunks: Dad, what's wrong? (Vegeta hugs Trunks) Ah, this is embarrassing. Dad, come on. Cut it out. Vegeta: Trunks, there's something you must know. You've made me proud, my son. (Vegeta swipes Trunks' neck, knocking him out in order to prevent him from attacking Buu) Goten: Uh!? What did you do to him!? Why'd you do that!? What's wrong with you!? Why did you do that to Trunks? You might've killed him. Why? Are you crazy? Why? Why did you do it? Tell me! Why did you do that to Trunks? You're his dad! Dads aren't supposed to do bad things to their sons. Why did you hit him!? Why did you hurt him like that? Why? Why? (Vegeta punches Goten in the gut, also knocking him out) Uh... Majin Buu: Me big mad. Which guy hit Buu? Vegeta: (to Piccolo) Take the two boys as far away from here as possible. Go now. Piccolo: Of course. Vegeta: It's time. Hurry. Piccolo: You'll die. You know that. Vegeta: There is one thing I'd like to know. Tell me...will I meet that clown Kakarot in the Other World? Piccolo: I'm not going to lie to you, Vegeta. Although the answer may be difficult for you to hear. This is the truth. Goku devoted his life to protecting the lives of others. Because of his selflessness...when he died...he was allowed to keep his body...and travel to King Kai's planet. You, on the other hand, have spent your life in pursuit of your own selfish desires. You've caused too much pain. When you die, you will not receive the same reward. Vegeta: Oh well. So be it. (Majin Buu is coming closer) That will be all. Get out of here. And hurry. Krillin: What's Vegeta up to, Piccolo!? He's crazy! He won't make it! That monster is gonna eat 'im alive! Piccolo: For the first time, Vegeta is fighting for someone other than himself. Controlling his own fate. Vegeta: You are a fool. I am going to crush you. And throw you into the wind. Majin Buu: Huh? Vegeta: (to himself) Trunks, Bulma...I do this for you. And yes, even for you Kakarot! (Vegeta erupts with rage, exploding and killing himself in order to obliterate Majin Buu) Yamcha: Uh...Chi-Chi...you didn't bring any guns on board, did ya? Chi-Chi: No, of course not. Uh, m...maybe a grenade or two though... Piccolo: (to himself) I don't sense anything, but that's definitely the place. He went out with a bang alright. Wow, what power it must've taken to produce a crater like that...Vegeta. No sign of Buu. I think it worked, Vegeta. Wait a second...there's Buu...or what's left of him...he's been blown into a thousand pieces. Now I understand, Buu would simply regenerate if damaged in the normal way, so you had to make an attack powerful enough to blow 'im to bits. Well, you did it Vegeta. It worked. Your sacrifice wasn't in vain. I've walked through that door before. I know it's not easy. Especially for a selfish guy like you. Hah. I was just like you once. Until Gohan's love changed me. I know you were changed too. I know how much courage it took to do what you did. Goodbye, my friend. Babidi: (Babidi is torn apart and dying) Help me, please... Piccolo: Help you? Heh. Why should I? Babidi: Please. Piccolo: When you help others, you receive help. When's the last time you used your powers to help someone? I'll bet it's been a while, hasn't it? Babidi: Help! Don't lecture me! Piccolo: You don't like being hurt, do you? But you delight in hurting others. You're right. You don't need a lecture. You need to be exterminated. Babidi: No! Babidi: (Babidi is torn apart and dying) Majin Buu! Help me! Please! Majin Buu: Uh oh. You stuck in hole! Hee hee. Babidi: You fool! Of course I'm stuck! I only have one arm left and not a leg to speak of! Majin Buu: Hmm...Buu no help. Buu no can help. Babidi: What are you talking about!? I know darn well that you can help me! Now do it! Majin Buu: Oh! You do first! What happened!? You tell! Babidi: What does it matter? Just hurry up and help me, lamebrain! It's not important! Majin Buu: Yes, yes! Buu want to know now! You tell now! Tell now! Tell now! Babidi: Majin Buu! Will you be quiet!? Just get me back to normal! Majin Buu: Back to normal!? Back to normal!? No! Never normal! Never normal! Can't go back! Can't go back! Babidi: Hurry up, Majin Buu! Do you realize what will happen if I die!? If I'm gone, no one will be left to set you free if you get sealed up again! Majin Buu: Hee hee hee hoo hoo...? Babidi: Ah, at last! It looks like I've finally penetrated that rubber head of yours! Grr...now fix me up before I keel over and die! Babidi: (to Majin Buu) A little killing spree is in order! Videl: It's kind of hard to believe that you can actually wish people back from the dead with these things. Yamcha: Well, look at me. I was as dead as you can get and I was wished back to life! Bulma: Don't worry, Videl. Most people come back normal. Yamcha: Hey, what's that supposed to mean!? Krillin: Hey, do ya have any more senzu beans? Yajirobe: We're not running a bean factory here, you just took our last three. We're gonna have to start charging! Krillin: I'm surprised that you haven't started charging already knowing you... Yajirobe: Hey! What do ya mean by that!? I live like a monk up here! I don't even have a TV set! Krillin: You don't have a TV? Wow, you really are roughing it up here! Lets vamoose Piccolo. Yajirobe: That's right! All I do is grow beans for you ingrates! I can't even get a pizza delivered up here! Krillin: If you weren't so lazy, you could learn how to fly! Yajirobe: Hey, he's right! I could fly my own pizza's up! Videl: (Bulma is reaching for a Dragon Ball high up on a mountain) Doin' great! Come on, old gal! Bulma: Old gal! She'd better watch it! Yamcha: (the Dragon Ball is in a lake) Hey, these clothes are expensive! I'm not jumpin' in there! Bulma: What kind of lame excuse is that!? Just take them off and go in your underwear! Yamcha: Heh heh heh. See uh...that poses a problem. Uh...I'm not wearing any. Heh... Bulma: Yeah, right! I bet you're just chickening out! Hmmm... (to Master Roshi) What about you!? Master Roshi: Aheh aheh...I'd definitely go if I didn't have this cold. Aheh. Bulma: The men are scared. Android 18: Well, I'm not. But I don't feel like getting wet right now...so no. Bulma: Least you were honest about it, unlike certain others I know! Krillin: I'm either hallucinating or that's Goku standing there! Goku, is that really you!? Goku: Hi. Krillin: He's real! He talks and everything! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Aha ha ha ha! Ha! Goku: (Krillin starts crying) Hey, what's the deal? Why are you so sad? I thought you'd be happy to see me. Krillin: I'm not sad you oaf! I'm just so happy that I could cry! You're alive! You're alive! Goku: Well, I'm about as alive as a dead guy can be! Krillin: Look at you! You look like you've been through a meat grinder! Goku: If only Vegeta hadn't been so arrogant. Thinking he could take on Buu alone. He'd still be alive. And we could work together. Piccolo: No. Don't punish yourself like this. It wouldn't have made any difference. Not even an army of Super Saiyans could've. Mister Popo: The young ones sleeping...Goten and Trunks are almost exactly the same size, aren't they? Could they do a fusion? Krillin: Umm...is that possible? Goku: Yeah! Thank you, Mister Popo! You know, that just might work! Dende: Really Goku!? Krillin: Mister Popo, I love you! You're a genius! Lets all give it up for Mister Popo the genius! Yamcha: Okay, now do you remember the spell to release him? You know all the words? Bulma: Of course. I'm not gonna pull a Frieza and screw it up, Yamcha! Master Roshi: Bulma...I think Frieza failed because he wore too many clothes. Bulma: (with sarcasm) That's fine. I'll just have to track down seven Dragon Balls again in four months...which shouldn't be any problem... Goku: That's the spirit. Dr. Brief: Your mother and I just can't bring ourselves to leave the little ones. We'll wait here for your return. Bulma: Will you two stop being so naive and open your eyes? Is it really worth risking both your lives just to stay here and feed and clean your stinking precious pets? Miss Brief: Remember...even if we meet a horrible, tragic, gruesome, and grotesque end at the hands of this Majin Buu, you're gonna wish to bring us back to life with the Dragon Balls...don't try to argue. We've made up our minds. Majin Buu: Buu's tummy is super big. These cakes itsy bitsy, but they taste so very yum yum yum! Supreme Kai: Kibito, do you feel that? Majin Buu's power level continues to increase substantially. Kibito: Yes, of course. His negative energy is impossible for me to ignore. It seems that even after being out of commission for thousands of years, Majin Buu is as unstoppable a force as ever. Every horrible possibility that I never even dared to fear has materialized today. Babidi: Snap out of it, you big baby! What's the matter with you!? Majin Buu: (whining) Buu still hungry. Babidi: All those sweets are just empty calories. I've got something more satisfying. Babidi: (while telepathically sending his message to Earth's inhabitants) The following material is of a violent nature and may be considered quite gratuitous. Enjoy. This program has been sponsored by your fellows. Majin Buu: Ahhh...what Buu want for eat!? Hmmm...oh, Buu eat too much cake...oh yes...yes! Buu want candy! (Buu fires his ray, turning all the inhabitants of a city into candy and eats them all) Ahhh... Babidi: This is but a small taste of what will happen if you don't surrender. Aha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Lady: (after Majin Buu eats everyone in a city) We're all done for! Somebody's gotta do something! I know I'm sweet, but I don't want to turn into candy! Ahaaaa! Guy: How do you think I feel? I've had my nose buried in these books for a year. Ahem. A whole year trying to get into a college that just got blown up. What a jip! I coulda been at the beach! Man: You think that's bad? Our wedding is tomorrow. Woman: And ever since I was a little girl, I've dreamed of my wedding day. (Woman chokes her man by pulling his tie and screaming) You're not getting out of this that easy! Man: Sorry, sweetheart! Gohan: Supreme Kai...uh...where...uh...are we? Supreme Kai: It's my world. It is the world of the Kais. Gohan: This is where you live? Huh...well...I uh...guess this means I'm dead, doesn't it? Hey! I don't get a halo like my dad has!? Supreme Kai: No. Now don't worry. You were in bad shape, but you're alive. Gohan: 'Kay. But if I'm not dead...then what am I doing here? Kibito: You are asking too many questions of the Supreme Kai. You should try to be more respectful. You are a guest here. No living mortal has ever stood on this ground. Supreme Kai: I brought Gohan here to get the Z sword. It's the only way that Majin Buu can be defeated now. Kibito: Huh!? The Z sword!? You...you can't be serious Supreme Kai! How can a mere Earthling do what the Kais themselves could not!? Don't you remember!? None of the Kais, not even you, were capable of freeing the Z sword! Supreme Kai: I'm aware of the power of the Z sword. And I'm certain that Gohan is the right person to wield it. Gohan: Uh...what's the Z sword? Trunks: Goten! What are you doing!? This is no time to be stuffing your face! Goten: Hold on Trunks. Please be quiet till I finish my meal. Trunks: Grr... Goten: You were the one that said it was bad manners to talk when a person was eating, remember? Goku: (Goten and Trunks are crying) I said stop that! There'll be no more tears from now on! You will have to be tough to stop Majin Buu! Kibito: (to Gohan) Your effort is in vain. If the Supreme Kai was unable to extract the sword, how can a simple mortal like yourself ever succeed? Gohan: (while struggling to hold the Z sword up) Hey, you know what...I think I figured out how I can use this thing to beat Majin Buu. Supreme Kai: Is that so? Gohan: It's so heavy...if I could just get him to hold it, he won't be able to move his arms. Kibito: Huh! How dare you make jokes!? Have you no respect for the power that is in your grasp!? Hercule Satan: Human beings can fly. It's just that our bodies have forgotten how to do it. We have to reteach ourselves just like Videl did. Babidi: (after Majin Buu turns all the inhabitants of a city into chocolate and eats them) Well, the fun is over here. It seems that Majin Buu is actually full for once. I guess that means the next city will have to settle for being pummeled into oblivion. Trunks: (telepathically) Babidi! Majin Buu! Can you hear me!? This is Trunks! Goten: And I'm Goten! Babidi: So, the two of you have decided to find some courage! Trunks: No! We've decided to find you! And you don't wanna know what we have in store for that day! Goten: It won't be pretty! Trunks: You know, I don't think this fusion stuff's as great as you say. Goku: Why don't you just give it a shot? Trunks: Okay, but it sounds kinda stupid if ya ask me. I mean, it's not like we're gonna beat Majin Buu by dancing on 'im. Goku: That's enough Trunks. Now both of you. Go Super Saiyan. Trunks: Fine, whatever. Goku: (after Trunks leaves to locate the Dragon Radar) Don't worry, Bulma. Trunks is a resourceful little guy. He'll be alright. Bulma: I know... Goku: No, I mean it. Vegeta isn't the only one of his parents he takes after, you know? Bulma: Thank you. Goku: You know, before you get to Capsule Corp., you're going to have to go through me! Babidi: Ha ha ha ha! That's a good one! Buu, you heard what he said. Go through him! I suppose he wants to end up just like his friend Vegeta! Babidi: Hey! Do you want to go back inside your ball for another million years!? Majin Buu: Buu stuck back in ball, you go bye bye! He gonna make ya dead! Babidi: (to himself) Oh, that's the problem with cronies. No matter how dumb they start off...they all end up trying to think for themselves. Goku: I'm guessing an ascended Super Saiyan isn't much of a challenge for you...so how 'bout I take it up to the next level? Babidi: The next level of ascended super-something...oh...oh...what...what's that? Babidi: Perhaps you're so terrified that you've begun to hallucinate...is that it? Goku: Perhaps... Goku: (Goku changes to a Super Saiyan) This is a Super Saiyan. And this... (after becoming an ascended Super Saiyan) ...this is what is known as a Super Saiyan that has ascended past a Super Saiyan. Or, you could just call this a Super Saiyan two. Majin Buu: Uhuh Uhuh... Babidi: Ho hum. What a useless transformation. You've changed your hair. So what? Piccolo: Has he really found a way to surpass an ascended Saiyan? Is that possible? Krillin: He must be bluffing. I mean...what would that make him? Double ascended? Majin Buu: (to Goku, after Goku turns into a Super Saiyan three) Buu not scared. Big hair make you big funny. Babidi: Yes, I'm inclined to agree. This super three-whatever you said...it's ridiculous. Majin Buu...I think our friend's in need of a haircut. Majin Buu: Buu have fun play with you. You strong. Goku: Thanks. So are you. Goku: Buu...I'm a man of courtesy, as well as strength. So I've got to tell you that I'm quite impressed by your fighting techniques. I've fought beings from beyond nameless galaxies and you by far are the best. Majin Buu: Thank you. Majin Buu: (after Goku changes back to a regular Saiyan) Hey! Why you go back to normal!? You and me not fight no more!? Buu have fun! Goku: Well, I had a lot of fun, too. But unfortunately, I have some place to be...and time won't allow me to play with you all day, Majin Buu. It's time for me to say goodbye. Babidi: They will never be strong enough to beat the two of us! Goku: Well, for starters, they're only going to fight one of you because the other seems to do nothing but bark orders. Oh, and Majin Buu...I think you're much too gifted a fighter to be controlled...by a coward like Babidi. Babidi: Ah! Shove it! (Babidi raises his middle finger to Goku) Majin Buu: Mister Babidi? Babidi: Wha...what is it? Majin Buu: Buu have a better idea. Babidi: You're actually having an idea! Doesn't that sound like a great trip. Okay then, why don't you tell me what you've come up with in that walnut-sized brain of yours! Majin Buu: (Buu gets close to Babidi) Buu have a great idea. Babidi: You said that already. Just cough it up so we can get on with the serious stuff. Majin Buu: Oohh...heh heh heh heh heh. (Majin Buu grabs Babidi by his neck) Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Babidi: Uhh!!!! Uhh!! Uhh!! Majin Buu: Ha ha! Now you no talk! Now no more could say words to seal Buu back up in ball! No no no! (Babidi is now choking) Majin Buu: (while choking Babidi) You teach me lots of good things, but Buu think it's time Babidi go. Bye bye bye! Ha ha ha ha ha! Bye bye! (Majin Buu smashes his arm into Babidi's face, blowing his head off and killing him) Piccolo: So, what happens now? Majin Buu has no one telling him what to do anymore. There's no denying that Babidi was definitely the brains of that particular operation. Majin Buu: Hello girl! You think Buu sexy? Girl: (afraid) Ah! Yes...uh...I think you're very, very sexy! Majin Buu: Yay! Then give Buu smooch! (Buu tries to kiss the girl) Girl: Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhh! Majin Buu: Why you teasing Buu!? Girl: Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhh! Majin Buu: You play with Buu feelings! (Majin Buu sees a magazine next to the girl) Hmmm...what this!? (Majin Buu picks up the magazine and looks at snapshots of men) So Earth girls like boys pretty like this, huh? How Buu supposed to live up to body image in magazine!? Ahh, Buu know! (Buu warps his face to look like an attractive male) Baby! (Buu tries to kiss the girl again) Girl: Ahhhhhhhhhhhhh! Get away! Majin Buu: You girls don't know what you want! How do you like candy!? Girl: Ahhhhhhhh! (Majin Buu turns the girl into a piece of candy and eats her) Majin Buu: Umm...umm...umm...ah! Yes, yes! Very nice. Buu like girls. Buu so great! Now, do a flip! Ha ha! Piccolo: (after Majin Buu decimates another city) He's even worse without Babidi. Goku: Hmm...I guess it's just in his nature to cause destruction. It's probably the only thing he's ever known to do. Piccolo: No. Don't go making excuses for him. There's no reason to demolish planets regardless of personality defects. Goku: Call me crazy. But after watching those boys fight each other at the junior division, I decided to take a chance. Piccolo: So you're going to wager the world's future on the shoulders of little children? Goku: I think it's a pretty safe bet. Don't you? Piccolo: Uh...you've always been a hopeless dreamer, Goku. Trunks: (Trunks holds up the Dragon Radar) Here it is, sir! Confirm! Is this your Dragon Radar? Goku: Confirmed! Good job, soldier! Mission accomplished! Trunks: Thank you, sir! Goku: You're gonna have to do the exact same moves in perfect symmetry alright? Lets give it a try. Trunks: Uh...uh... Goten: Uh... Goku: Huh? What's wrong? Trunks: Uh...I...I don't think Goten knows what symmetry is, sir. Piccolo: Goku, would you have really asked Vegeta to do this fusion move with you if he were still alive? Goku: Huh? Piccolo: It's just that...well I can't imagine Vegeta subjecting himself to something like this. Bulma: I wish they'd hurry. If Goten weren't holding my Trunks back, they'd be ready to fight Majin Buu right now and could keep all those people from getting killed. Krillin: (to himself, angrily) Grr...somebody's gonna have to hold me back if she keeps talking like that! Majin Buu: (while he's in the tub) Bubbles take edge off. Ahh...just like bath water. (Buu wears pajamas) There you go little toes. Buu feel so fresh and so clean in brand new pajamas...pop...makes Buu feel all warm cuddly on inside. So soft and comfy against Buu's clean skin, just like wearing a thin red layer of fluffy clouds... Goku: (Goku is saying farewell and returning to Other World) I'll see you all sooner or later... Krillin: (crying) Ha. Where you're going...I hope it's a bit later than sooner. Fortuneteller Baba: (after seeing the line for the deceased) Goku, I'm surprised at you. You're not going to cut in line, are you? Goku: I sure am. But don't tell. King Yemma: Oh, and Goku. A hard case came through a while ago. Name's Dabura. I think you know this guy. Goku: Uh, yeah. King Yemma: I knew it. He was a handful...I can tell you that. (remembering what he told Dabura) Listen, you better behave yourself in here, understand me? (to Goku) He was supposed to go below, but he would have enjoyed that so I gave him my stamp of approval and admitted him up here. Goku: Aha ha ha! Nice going, King! Goten: What's for breakfast? Piccolo: Breakfast!? You're having the fusion technique for breakfast! That's what! Majin Buu: (after he heals a blind boy) Is Buu hideous? Boy: Gosh, I don't know Buu. You're the first person I've ever seen. But hey, I know you're beautiful on the inside. Majin Buu: Oh. Ha ha ha ha. Buu like you. Buu like you. Majin Buu: No hideous. Buu beautiful. No hideous. Buu beautiful. No hideous. Buu beautiful. Wooohoooooo! Android 18: Fusion-uhh! Master Roshi: I tell ya...it's enough to drive someone crazy, isn't it? Android 18: I even dreamed about it last night. Puar was trying to fuse with the Ox-King. Goku: (after picking up a huge boulder to throw at Gohan for their training) Lets start out with this small one. Gohan: Right, dad. Ready when you are. Supreme Kai: That's a small one!? Gohan: (after the Z sword breaks) Huh...oh no. Now it's...the...Z dagger...? Goku: My old master likes girly magazines. We'll get you some! Gohan: Oh boy! Uh, dad... Supreme Kai: Goku, please! How inappropriate! Elder Kai: Hmph! I have no need for such things. With my omniscient vision, I can see girls playing volleyball on the beach! Heh heh! Supreme Kai: You call yourself a Kai!? Goku: Hey, old man! How 'bout we get you a date with a real live Earth woman!? Elder Kai: Is she a good kisser? Goku: Yeah, of course. Elder Kai: Eheh heh heh...heh heh heh heh... Goku: (to himself) What luck...this guy's just like Master Roshi... Gohan: Dad, are you nuts! How are you going to find someone that wants to kiss that guy? Goku: Hey, don't worry. I can't go back to Earth, but you can. This is all too simple. You can handle it, son. It might require a little sacrifice though. Can you get Videl to do it? Gohan: Dad! I'm not gonna ask my girlfriend to kiss that old relic! Goku: Okay, okay. Sheesh. Who else do we know...? Elder Kai: Funny though...I always thought it would be a Kai that broke the Z sword and rescued me, but you're more of a shoe-shine boy than a hero, huh? The Kai's been rescued by mere mortals. Things have sure gone downhill. Supreme Kai: Well, sir. I've always tried my best... Krillin: So...uh...if you could fuse together with somebody and it could be anyone in the world, who would it be? Now, I mean...hypothetically... Master Roshi: Gosh, that's a tough one, but I think I'd pick your old girlfriend, Maron. Krillin: Heh heh heh heh heh heh! Right on! Bald and beautiful! So deadly! Master Roshi: (after Goten and Trunks botch the fusion and fuse into a deformed version of Gotenks) He's my age! Krillin: No, older. Videl: (after Goten and Trunks fuse into Gotenks) Wow, he's a cutie. Bulma: I think he favors Trunks a little bit. What do you think, Chi-Chi? Chi-Chi: The nose, yes. The eyes, no. Videl: He's got fabulous energy. Does it matter who he looks like? But, he does have Goten's hair. Gotenks: If you're looking for the guy who just turned you into a doughnut, that would be me. Hello. You're going to wish that we never met! Majin Buu: Buu no wish! Buu make boy dead! Gotenks: No no no. Boy make Buu dead. Yes yes. Piccolo: From now on, we do things my way! Tomorrow, you are going to fight Buu as a Super Saiyan and until then, we train! Understood, Trunkten!? Mister Popo: Actually, it's Gotenks... Piccolo: What!!!? Mister Popo: His name. It's...uh...Gotenks... Piccolo: His name is mud as far as I'm concerned! Piccolo: No fighter that has ever won a victory did so using his fists alone. All battles are won before they are even fought, and do you know how? Trunks: By planning? Piccolo: That's right. Hercule Satan: I was told a long time ago that the most important key to victory is the element of surprise. Majin Buu: (to Hercule Satan) So, do you want to be candy, cookie, or pudding when Buu eats you? Majin Buu: This candy made from people good! Try some! You eat! Hercule Satan: Oh, of course. Human candy is some of my favorite stuff in the world. Hercule Satan: (to Majin Buu) Say, Mister Buu...are ya hungry at all? I don't mean ta brag, but I'm a pretty good cook. What d'ya say, hmm? Van Zant: (after Van Zant kills an old lady with his sniper) Yeah! One shot and she's down! Smitty: You really think that's the right thing to do? Van Zant: Smitty, it's the end of the world! Majin Buu's going around killing everyone! Why shouldn't I? All bets are off now when I'm cashing my chips in! I'm gonna do everything I ever wanted to do! Like murder! You should give it a shot, if you know what I mean. Hercule Satan: Wait. Where are you going? Majin Buu: Buu kill more people now. Hercule Satan: Uh!? Majin Buu: You want kill people too? Hercule Satan: I'm really more of a chef than a fighter. Hercule Satan: (to himself, about Majin Buu) Tubby won't even know what hit 'im! I got enough dynamite here to blow up a tank! All I have to do is push this little button, and it's goodbye Majin Buu. They're gonna have to scrape 'im off the walls after this blast. Yeah! And I'll be the man who saved the world again! Van Zant: (to Smitty, while gunning down people with a machine gun) Every single person on Earth is gonna die soon. Wouldn't you like to go out with a bang in the end!? Hercule Satan: Uh...why do you fly around...uh...you know, killin' people...and destroyin' all our cities? Majin Buu: Buu was told to. Hercule Satan: Who told you that? Majin Buu: Bibidi told Buu to kill people...Babidi said to destroy. Hercule Satan: You know, you don't have to listen to them. Majin Buu: Buu not know what else Buu can do. Van Zant: That's the joy of armageddon, Smitty. Everyone gets their turn. Piccolo: I don't like Mister Satan. But I don't want him to get hurt. He's in grave danger. Elder Kai: You know, when people succeed, they're geniuses. Until then, they're kooks. Elder Kai: We must finish soon. Yes, that way I can get my kiss. Van Zant: (to Hercule) Some hero... he's destroying our world and you're cooking him meals like a nanny! Trunks: You're too uptight! Just leave it to us! We're strong enough to beat that guy already! Piccolo: Why you little...! I've fought with both of your fathers in combat! Since before you were born! You two don't have a clue! Even the smallest bit of power can mean the difference between winning and losing! Dende: Most unusual. Piccolo: Never train children when their mothers are around. It's always trouble. Hercule: I should've known! Nobody wants to mess with the mighty Mister Satan! No siree! I am the king! Aha ha! I don't blame him. I'm twice the size of that pink sissy! And he didn't want any of this, anyway! No way, baby! Piccolo: The fused Trunks and Goten should put up a good fight. If they can fit it into their schedule that is! Goten: Hey, lets take a bath together! Trunks: No way! Forget it! Krillin: (after seeing Super Buu) I...I liked the first one better. What happened? Piccolo: Well, he transformed...obviously. Super Buu: I was promised a good fight. Produce the challenger. Which one of you is it? Don't be shy. Come forward. The time has arrived. Videl: What's an hour? It's no big deal! Unless you're scared! Is that it, Buu? Super Buu: Loud-mouth girl! You should die! Super Buu: Very well. This Majin Buu will wait one hour. Then I will kill you all. Supreme Kai: (about Elder Kai unlocking Gohan's potential) Very impressive. Goku: Incredible. I really didn't think that he could pull it off. Supreme Kai: I knew. He's a Kai. My great ancestor. He's brilliant. And shameless. Goku: What do ya mean shameless? He was telling the truth the whole time, Supreme Kai. Supreme Kai: I mean the kiss. Goku: Oh yeah, that's right. Now we're going to have to deliver. I hope Bulma agrees. Eheh. Ah, sure, she will. It's to save the world! Piccolo: (to Videl) Your father is a hero. He took it upon himself to journey to Majin Buu's home and fight him on his own ground. For reasons we don't know, Mister Satan did not fight Majin Buu. Instead, the two forged a friendship. Your father is the only human being Majin Buu seems to appreciate. Although other circumstances brought it to a halt, your father nearly made Buu adopt a life of peace. He may have transformed into this evil entity now, but Buu still has a potent memory of a man and the kindness he showed a monster. Your dad will never have the powers that we do, Videl. But, his compassion exceeds any victory he could ever achieve in the ring. Piccolo: Would you care to eat before the fight? Super Buu: No! I don't want to eat! You take me there now before I break you in half! Piccolo: Of course. Trunks: All that training and Piccolo is the only one who came to watch us. Why didn't anyone else come? Trunks: We might not have an audience, but let's still give a good show! Super Buu: Too bad no one else is here to witness your final hour. Gotenks: Final hour? That's pretty clever. Guess you can tell jokes now that you're not a tub o' lard. Gotenks: Piccolo, be honest. Do you think that there's any way that I can beat this guy? Piccolo: I think there's a way to succeed in everything. You just have to be serious about it. Gotenks: That's no answer. Super Buu: All you people do is talk! Super Buu: I've had enough. I should be fighting great warriors. There's nothing great about you! Gotenks: But this particular move might cut him in half...which is fine. Gotenks: Your moves are so predictable. Super Buu: If you really think that, you would have your guard up! Goku: Wow, he's good. And the Old Kai's even boosted Gohan's power. You better be careful, Supreme Kai, or you could be out of a job. Supreme Kai: Hmph. Truly. You'd think I hadn't done anything for you and Gohan at all. Piccolo: Don't celebrate yet. Lets wait until the smoke clears. Gotenks: Bummer. I mastermind a scheme that stops Majin Buu and I still get stuck with cleanup duty. What a jip. Piccolo: It's my fault. I thought that by luring Majin Buu into the Hyperbolic Time Chamber, it would give you the advantage you need to destroy him. I put too much faith in you. Piccolo: Make yourselves at home. You're indeed stronger than Gotenks and I, but it doesn't matter now. Whether you like it or not, Majin Buu, we'll be spending the rest of our lives in this place together. Gotenks: Uh...Piccolo? We're stuck here? Piccolo: Yes. Of course our friend here could still try to get rid of us if he wants. But, then he'd be all alone. Piccolo: We're all stuck in here together. So I guess we better make ourselves comfortable. Super Buu: But how do we eat candy? Piccolo: We don't. There's none here. Super Buu: None? No ice cream? No...no chocolate? Piccolo: Heh heh heh. Nothing. All gone. Super Buu: Which person should I eat first? Krillin: Goku, Gohan, and Vegeta couldn't even beat this monster! So what chance do I have against him? Gotenks: (after transforming into a Super Saiyan 3) Not only am I freaky looking, I'm stronger, I'm faster and I'm ready for action. Gotenks: (after hearing that Buu turned everyone into chocolate and ate them all) Buu, you'll pay for each one!! Super Buu: For such a little guy, you have a stormy temper. What would your mother say to that? Gotenks: You just keep on talking while I smack you around. Goku: If I were Majin Buu, I'd have to consider running away at this point. Gotenks: (to Super Buu) For a pink guy, you've got bad temper. Hercule: You finally did it, Buu. Just like you wanted from the start. You put an end to humanity. Piccolo: (about Gotenks) Why does the strongest fighter left have to be so darn ridiculous? Piccolo: You did hurt him. But it's not his body that's suffering. You've damaged his ego. As a fighter, you're his equal. He's never fought anyone as strong as himself. This creature has never faced a true challenge and I suspect, he doesn't know how to handle it. Gotenks: Ha ha ha ha ha ha! You mean Majin Buu is a little scaredy-cat. But how can you blame him? He's up against the best fighter in the world, don't you think? Give me five more minutes with him and he's toast! Elder Kai: (to Gohan) Stay focused. Now take that anger swelling inside you and use it to your advantage. Gohan: Now that my training is over, how do I make sure what you did comes through in my fighting? Elder Kai: Well, you just do that Super Saiyan thing you always do and stop worrying. It'll happen. Just make sure you let it. Gohan: All I have to do is become a Super Saiyan and believe. (Gohan begins to power up) Elder Kai: Try believing someplace else! Goku: (to Gohan) Show 'em what a Saiyan's made of! Kibito: We anticipate great things to come from you, Gohan. Please don't leave us and the world disappointed. Gohan: No way. I'm not gonna start disappointing people now. Super Buu: (to Gohan) I turned them all into chocolate and gobbled them up! Super Buu: So, hotshot! You want to fight Majin Buu? Gohan: Fight you? No. I wanna kill you! Super Buu: You're making a mistake. I'll make you dead. Gohan: What's wrong? I thought you said something about making me dead? Super Buu: Grr! Rah! Buu make you dead! What Buu say, Buu do! Now you die! Gohan: (to Super Buu) You can get up now. I know you're not hurt. Not from an attack like that. Gohan: What's the matter? Boo boo? Super Buu: Buu! Not boo boo! Fool! I'll kill you all! Super Buu: I can't let a power greater than mine exist. Super Buu: Now you'll see what happens to those I hate! Stupid boy! You will pay! Ha! Yes! You're going to pay for everything you did to me! Hercule: (stranded in the desert) This must be the punishment for all the lies I've told in my life. The fame and fortune and women. Elder Kai: Doesn't this generation know how to plan? My goodness. Do I have to do everything? Hercule: (Screaming) WHAAAAAAAAAT!!!! M-M-M-MY SWEET LITTLE VIDEL IS DEAD?! (Hercule and Bee whimper). My poor Videl. How could Buu do that to her? Darn him. He was my friend. (Starts crying). Hercule: (Unusually jumps to Gohan and starts floating. Unusual, because he can't fly.) What's wrong with you? Why didn't you protect my little girl, huh? What kind of boyfriend are you, huh, pal? Gohan: I wasn't there. Goten: Hey, don't worry sir, she'll come back to life. (He means by use of the dragon balls.) Hercule: Huh? (Jumps towards Goten and starts shaking him. Goten starts to blabber and chuckle due to the tickling of the shaking). What are you talking about? She's dead, you little imp! How are you gonna bring her back to life? (Hercule doesn't know about the dragon balls, go figure.) Goten: (Still being shaken and chuckling). Hercule: (Misunderstands and thinks Goten's chuckling because he was joking about Videl coming back. Still shaking him.) No joking around!  This is my daughter we're talking about. Goten: (Finally not being shaken or chuckling anymore, but annoyed.) I'm not joking!!! Piccolo: Goten! Trunks! Hold your ground for a moment! I'm sensing some kind of...deception. Trunks: Come on, Piccolo. You gotta be kidding! He's not smart enough for somethin' like that! He can't even spell deception. Super Buu: (to himself) The power of Gotenks and the mind of Piccolo. Unstoppable. Gotenks: I'll beat on Buu for a little while. Then, I might be nice enough to give you another shot at him. Gohan: Nice attitude. You've definitely got some Vegeta in you. Gotenks: Thank you. Super Buu: (after absorbing Gotenks and Piccolo) I suppose the sudden loss of your friends and family has left you speechless, Gohan. Hurry and drain your tears so we can fight. Super Buu: (Gotenks absorbed) I'm not interested in fairness. I'm interested in the extinction of every living creature on this planet! A good fighter knows his mental and physical limitations. But a great fighter will figure a way around them. Elder Kai: I'll give you the life that's left inside of me. Then you can make your return to Earth. Goku: You mean, you're giving up your life...for me? Kibito: Venerable Elder, this is the most unorthodox behavior! You can't just offer up your life to handle a single...situation! Elder Kai: As usual, you're missing the bigger picture. After Earth, Majin Buu will come here. Kibito: Huh!? Supreme Kai: If that is true, then let me give up my life. Kibito: What!? No, master! Supreme Kai: Majin Buu has been my enemy to destroy since Bibidi thousands of years ago and repeatedly, I've failed. You must allow me to pay my own debt. Elder Kai: You're ambitious, but too hard on yourself. Let the old men sacrifice their lives so that the young ones can live. Supreme Kai: My dear Kai... Goku: You're...too kind. Vegeta: The mighty King Yemma comes groveling to me. Well the deal stays regardless of the outcome. And I don't plan to blow myself up for him again. Super Buu: (Gotenks absorbed) Without your father holding your hand, you really are nothing. Super Buu: (Gotenks absorbed) Hiding only proves your cowardice, my young fighter. Super Buu: (Gotenks absorbed) That really hurt, didn't it, Gohan? Facing your fears would've been far less painful. Goku: It's going to be strange joining with my son, I just hope Chi-Chi doesn't make me go to school with him. Super Buu: (Gotenks absorbed) Where's the hole these pests are crawling out from? Oh well, it's just more fun for me! Super Buu: (Gotenks absorbed) So, not one among you can stop me! Then the end of the Earth is on your heads! Super Buu: (Gotenks absorbed) I'm sorry. I interrupted you. You were giving a speech. Something about making me answer for my crimes? Honestly, I was finding it a little clich. Super Buu: (Piccolo absorbed) For your sake, I hope you brought some insurance to back up your claims. Heh. But knowing you, Goku, you probably don't even know what insurance means. Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) So, what are you going to do now? Think, Goku. Both of your sons are a part of me now. Maybe we should seek family counseling! Goku: You're the monster who devoured everyone we care about! Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Yes, I suppose I did. But you were supposed to stop me. Goku: Grr...! Super Buu: Oh, don't take it too personally, Goku. Everybody fails. Your failure just means the end of the world. Vegeta: (to Goku, about Majin Buu) You think he's the most powerful being in the universe, and maybe he is. But just like you, he does not have true pride! I don't expect you to understand. Not you Kakarot! I sent myself into a cold oblivion and I did it on a lie! The Saiyan prince will not fall again! Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) I suppose this canyon here will make a good cemetery for them both. Goku: Wake up! Majin Buu's eaten everyone we care about! Everyone is gone! Even Bulma! Vegeta: Uh!? Goku: They've become part of Buu! They can't even die! I just thought the least we could do is put our old differences aside, just this once, and really work together! We owe that to our teammates! Our families, Vegeta! Our friends! Look, you've always talked about our Saiyan race, how we're the last of a mighty people. Well, it's time we accept we're starting a new race, one that can be just as strong, just as proud! But not if we're caught up in so much of our old birthrights to see what we have right in front of us! We've lost our old race, Vegeta! Lets not lose this one too! Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) The only thing this two-man fusion has done is make you twice as foolish as before. Elder Kai: Honestly, I worry about these Saiyans. Seems their love of battle might work against them. But if anyone is to defeat Majin Buu, it will be them. You can bet a nickel on that. Dabura: (to Chi-Chi) Your boy has a heart of fine gold. I know he's around here somewhere. Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) Every time I have destroyed a planet, I have taken a piece of its energy with me. This orb is the culmination of ions of destruction. Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) But you still don't compare. No one compares to me. Vegito: You're wrong, Buu. I'm destined to destroy you. Vegito: (to Super Buu) It's quality, not quantity, my friend. And our union wasn't achieved by kidnappings. Hmm... but if you're sure you can win this fight with petty theft, come prove it. Vegito: (to Super Buu) You villains never really do take true pride in your fighting skills. It takes more than eyesight and a strong arm to be a warrior. Kibitokai: (to Elder Kai) I'm sorry, but I've been dreading Majin Buu for so long. And now, seeing his defeat, it's a relief I can't describe! Vegito: I'd say add some spice. But I don't think anything would get your bad taste out of my mouth. I'm taking you off the menu. Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) You've got some nerve making me into a joke! I'll destroy you, I swear if it's the last thing I do! I'm not your entertainment! Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) You led me to this, you mortal freak! It's your fault! Vegito: (after popping Super Buu's antenna) Come now, you shouldn't be angry. You know I was only trying to help you. Besides, you looked ridiculous with that big banana on your head. This is a much better look for you. Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) You! I hate you! Vegito: Hey, that was a clever idea, using that Kamehameha wave, Buu. Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) Grr... Vegito: No, really. And then that Galick Gun. Whoah, yeah. I could've been killed. Hmm...maybe I am exaggerating a little bit, but I could've at least gotten a bruise or a little cut. Dabura: So this is love. Beautiful lovely love. Oo, now I've seen it with my own eyes. Love, the most powerful force in the world. Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) I like your style. You're going to make great candy! Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) Should I chew you to bits, or lick you to death? Yamcha: (in Other World) You know, shoot, if this place had some pretty girls, I wouldn't even care about going back to Earth. Let Majin Buu have it. All we like is the chicks. Elder Kai: As long as that beast is still alive, the entire physical cosmos faces extinction. Vegito: You're coming apart on me, Majin Buu. Is this how you want it to end, huh? So much for the tough warrior. Vegito: Are you so blind that you still can't see the difference between your power and mine? Vegito: (to himself) Alright, Majin Buu. You've cursed the Earth with your presence long enough. Your time's about to expire. Elder Kai: (about Super Buu absorbing Vegito) He's having trouble digesting those two. I have that problem with Mexican food. Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) I should've saved some people. It's not as fun without hearing their ridiculous cries for help! Super Buu: (Gohan absorbed) There will be no one left who has the audacity to stop me! Soon, I will be the sole proprietor of the entire universe! Vegeta: I prefer to be the captain of my own ship. Vegeta: (in Super Buu's body, as they are about to be digested) What are we going to do? Goku: We're going to get sucked into that hole. Vegeta: No, Kakarot, I mean how are we going to stop it? Vegeta: (Inside Super Buu's Head) Okay, use your instincts, Kakarot. Right or left? Goku: Hmm. I'd have to say... left! Vegeta: Good. Then I'm going right! Goku: (In a hurt tone of voice) That's not very nice! Vegeta: You follow your instincts and I will follow mine. (begins walking away) Goku: Fine! Have it your way! (Sticks his tongue out at Vegeta) Vegeta: Fool! You know you're just digging your own grave! Hercule: (about Super Buu) Look, I don't wanna fight 'im! Dende: Well, that's good, because no sane person would. But we're gonna do it anyway. Vegeta: (about the thought manifestations they are fighting inside Super Buu's head) Not even a little scratch. These look-alikes are not made of flesh and bone. Goku: Yeah. But it sure does feel like it when these guys come after us. Elder Kai: That buffoon Majin Buu just couldn't keep his thoughts straight. All he could think about are pastries! Vegeta: That pose is not fit for a Saiyan warrior. It's too prissy. Goku: What? Is that all? Vegeta: What do you mean is that all? That's enough! Where's your dignity? We're Saiyans! Goku: Hmm...but no one's going to see us. Gosh, Vegeta, is it really that bad? Vegeta: Grr...we're fighters! Not ballet dancers, you oaf! Goku: (to Super Buu) I think I know how to get that smirk off your ugly mug. I'm going to renovate your face. Vegeta: Saiyans cheek to cheek in battle. What's next? Super Buu: Knock, knock! Vegeta: Who's there? Super Buu: Buu. Vegeta: Buu who? Super Buu: Aw, don't cry. Everyone has to die sometime. Goku: Hey, easy there. He's doing it on purpose. We can't let him get to us. We've got to keep our cool. It's the only way we're going to be able to beat him. Vegeta: You're right, Kakarot. A warrior must remain detached. Super Buu: You've lasted pretty long. How a weakling like you still has energy left is beyond me. Goku: Yeah, well, I don't expect you to be able to comprehend me. Goku: (after they escape from Super Buu's head and his friends pop up in the air) Look Vegeta! People popcorn! Vegeta: What is he on? Goku: Fresh air and sunshine. Wow. Vegeta: That was a disgusting experience. Goku: Aw. It wasn't that bad. Vegeta: Speak for yourself. Vegeta: (as Super Buu is painfully struggling to maintain his form) Watch. He's about to change. Goku: Into a better dancer, I hope. Vegeta: He's shrunk. And you were so worried. Goku: Ha. You weren't worried, huh? You had white knuckles and you know it. Vegeta: (Vegeta puts Trunks and Piccolo on the ground) Pod life is no life at all. Goku: No kidding. I hope they're alright. (Goku puts Gohan and Goten on the ground) There you go, little man. Vegeta: They did well to stay alive. That was a feat in and of itself. Goku: Yeah, that's for sure. Kibitokai: But, as with most harmonious times, a period of disharmony was soon to follow. Kibitokai: I, too, would've perished on that day like all of the others. I didn't stand a chance against Majin Buu. I was staring death in the face. Vegeta: Hey, Buu! It's your business if you want to blow up the planet! But fight us first, you little coward! Vegeta: (about Kid Buu) I can't believe that maniac blew up the Earth! Dende: That's no ordinary old man. He's a Kai. Hercule: He does look a little strange. A Kai? What's that? Some sort o' purple leprechaun? Dende: No. The Kais are the illustrious overseers of the universe. Each Kai protects one of the quadrants. But these two, they're actually Supreme Kais. No one in the whole universe has more authority than them. Hercule: Really? Hmm...uh... I've got a question then. If these two are so great and powerful, why don't they stop Majin Buu. Elder Kai: Eh? Kibitokai: Uh? Dende: Uh... Elder Kai: They saved this nut? My word. Hercule: Hey, they have pointy ears, too. And I'm thinkin' you must be one of them, kid. Dende: Eh... Hercule: Hey! Dende: Uh? Hercule: Yeah, now I get it. Aha ha ha! This is all a dream! Aha ha ha! Just a silly old dream! Of course, of course. Now it all makes sense. First of all, there couldn't be somebody who's stronger than me, the undisputed Martial Arts Champion of the World! Ha, ha ha! Secondly, pink monsters like Buu don't exist and neither do purple people with pointy ears, now do they?! And, there's no such thing as little green men that guard the Earth from evil! Dende: But, sir... Hercule: And how absurd is this? Look at all those moons! (Hercule starts running to the edge of a mountain) Dende: Hey, wait! Where are you going? Hercule: I'm gonna fly away. It's my dream and I can do whatever I want. (Hercule reaches the edge) Hey! Yo! Majin Buu! I don't care if this is a dream! No one hurts my daughter, Videl, or the Earth! Do ya got that, pal! I'm comin' for you, you pink stink! Prepare to die! Dende: Uh... Hercule: Oh...yeah...oh...okay... (Hercule jumps off the cliff) Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh! (Hercule hits the ground) Oh, the...the pain...oh... How can it hurt so bad if this is a dream? Uh.... Elder Kai: You can't pay for entertainment like this. Kibitokai: Wait. I'm not sure what the Dragon Balls are, but I'm a Kai. My instantaneous movement is not limited by distance. I can go anywhere I want, see? Vegeta: (after Goku suggests to the Elder Kai that he'd provide a woman for him to kiss) Hey, Kakarot! Goku: Uh? Vegeta: You wouldn't happen to be talking about Bulma by any chance!? Goku: Hee hee hee... Vegeta: Oh, you are, aren't you!? You idiot! How could you!? Don't you have any sense at all? Let him kiss your woman! Goku: But she's not near as pretty as Bulma is, see? It's a compliment. Olibu: (to Kid Buu) So what? What did you prove? That you're a big loudmouth, huh? Yamcha: (about Kid Buu's blast) That attack isn't meant for us. He's gonna blow up the whole darn planet! Goku: (about Kid Buu) No. This can't go on anymore. He's killed too many innocent people. It's not right! Hercule: This Buu has a screw loose. Kibitokai: (about Hercule and Bee) Oh no! What have we done? We forgot to bring that other man and his dog with us when we left! Elder Kai: That poor dog. King Kai: That's Buu. You fought him yourself a long time ago, remember? Hello? He was wreaking havoc all over the universe... total destruction... a mess... West Kai: Ahhh! You gotta be kidding me! That's him? That's Bibidi's madman? He's been revived again? This is terrible! Goku: Okay. On to plan B. Whatever that is. Goku: (as a Super Saiyan 3, to Kid Buu) I know we're both under a lot of pressure, but lets try to keep our heads on our shoulders. Frieza: (about Goku) He's not that great. I know I could've beat him if I didn't lose both of my legs! Lousy, no good Saiyan monkey! (Frieza sticks his tongue out) Cell: Who's Goku fighting with? That imp's giving him a tougher fight than I did and he quit against me. Goz: I don't know, but I do like that pink. Mez: He sure packs a wallop. Babidi: (to himself) You disobedient, disrespectful creature. Buu, I hope you get blown to smithereens. How dare you make a mockery out of me!? Heh heh heh heh. Do it, Goku! Beat the Buu! Vegeta: (after Goku is beaten by Kid Buu) Look, I know it's your turn, Kakarot. But, I think I better cut in at this point. Unless you're finished eating dirt? Vegeta:(to himself, while Goku is fighting against Kid Buu) Amazing. How do you do it, Kakarot? You've always been like this, ever since the day I first met you, always ready to meet the next challenge, even if it's bigger than you are. It was the same on Namek. You had improved so much that it made Recoome look like he was standing still! Your power had increased so dramatically since our battle on Earth that I thought you had done it. I thought... that you had become... a Super Saiyan! It tore me apart! How could a low class soldier accomplish so easily what I, I had struggled my whole life to achieve? After three millenia it has finally happened! A new Super Saiyan has emerged! And somehow, I have become this pauper's witness! Then, at last, it happened. I too, transformed. After living every moment of every day for the singular purpose of surpassing you, I finally became a Super Saiyan myself. The prince had reclaimed his throne and fulfilled his destiny! But no matter how strong I became, your power still exceeded mine. At first I thought it was your loved ones, that it was your instinct to protect them that spurred you on, and pushed you beyond your limits. But then I found myself with a family of my own. And my power didn't increase at all... I used to fight for the sheer pleasure of it, for the thrill of the hunt! Oh, I had the strength unmeasurable. I spared no one. And yet, you showed mercy to everyone, even your fiercest enemies... even me! Yet you never fought to kill, or for revenge, only to test your limits, and to push yourself beyond them, to become the strongest you could possibly be. How can a Saiyan fight like that and at the same time be so gentle that he wouldn't hurt a fly? Oh, it makes me angry just thinking about it! But, perhaps it is my anger that has made me blind to the truth for so long. I see it now, this day has made it all too clear. You're better than me, Kakarot. You are the best. Goku: (Super Saiyan 3) I feel like a hamster on a wheel. Doesn't matter how much energy I put out. I still don't get anywhere. Goku: (Super Saiyan 3) I'll need time! Vegeta: How much time? Goku: If I even had one minute... just one minute with no interruptions. Vegeta: In this fight, one minute is eternity. Vegeta: Your minute. I've got it covered. Get the rest that you need. Goku: (Super Saiyan 3) But Vegeta, you could die. Vegeta: If I can't last one lousy minute, then perhaps I deserve to die. Goku: Hey, that's not true. Vegeta: Sixty seconds, Kakarot. Vegeta: (to Kid Buu) You're no warrior! You're just a mindless freak of nature! A big wad of spit out chewing gum! Vegeta: You're nothing. Just a trickster. I am a warrior! The Saiyan prince! Vegeta!!! Hercule: (to Kid Buu) You had your way with those other two, but lets see how you do against the World Champion. Elder Kai: So the Evil Buu spit the Good Buu out like a piece of used up chewing gum. That means he'll attack Mister Satan now. But I guess it doesn't really matter at this point. Kibitokai: I don't know. He has a few serious character flaws, that's for sure. But as fate would have it, he's the last human alive. You see? The sole survivor. Hercule: (to Kid Buu) Alright, you scoundrel. I'll give you one last chance. If you don't wanna be destroyed, then surrender now. Or at least apologize. Majin Buu: (to Kid Buu, about Hercule) You leave alone. Him Buu's buddy. Majin Buu: Me big Buu. Why little Buu stronger? Hmm... Elder Kai: The Dragon Balls? We can't use them to settle our affairs. Dende: But sir, Vegeta needs them. He must have a plan. Elder Kai: Plan, shman. No can do. Dende: Yeah, but this isn't our affair. Don't you see, it's everyone's. And if we don't do everything in our power to help, we're as guilty as Buu. Elder Kai: Alright, take it easy. You made your point. Vegeta: Kakarot, how many times have you saved the world up until now? Goku: Hmm...what? How many? I'm not sure. Vegeta: Just a ball park. Goku: Well, gosh. Half a dozen, at least. Vegeta: Then perhaps it's time to let the world fend for itself for once. Muuri: Sometimes, a guardian must follow his heart instead of the rules. Dende: This is awful. We didn't give Porunga that ability because Nameks don't believe in wishing people back to life. Muuri: Ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. As Earthlings say, chill out. After that Frieza debacle, we restyled the Dragon Balls and increased Porunga's power. Dende: You mean he can grant the wish!? Muuri: Yes, he can. Elder Kai: Oh, sure. Just great. So much for the natural evolution of the universe. Krillin: Am I going crazy, or are we really back on Kami's lookout? Oolong: What do you mean? You've always been crazy. Dabura: Dear Videl, Chi-Chi, Bulma... I'm so glad you made it home. Oh, how I wish I could've joined you. But not this time. For too long, love has been a stranger in my cold heart. Maybe next time, dear ones. Maybe next time. Vegeta: I've learned not to underestimate the power of the human race. Vegeta: (about Earth's people) Darn those idiots! Don't they care about their own world? They're like children! Everything has to be done for them! When are you going to grow up! Can't you Earthlings do anything for yourselves? Frieza: Heh heh heh heh heh. Vegeta is a master tactician. His plan is excellent. Heh heh heh heh heh heh heh. Except for one thing. He put his faith in a plebeian race from the Dark Ages. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. I finally get to see those monkeys fry! Ha ha ha ha ha! Vegeta: (to the people of Earth) Stand up for your planet. Raise your hands. Lend your strength. And get rid of Majin Buu before he gets rid of you. Upa: (about Goku) Hey, father. Who is that? Bora: Well, I think you know. The scar on my chest reminds us. It's Goku, our friend, who rescued me from death itself. There's no doubt. Android 17: (about Goku) It's been a long time since I heard that voice. (Android 17 sees two hunters walking in the woods and points his shotgun at them so they can raise their hands for Goku's Spirit Bomb) Well, what do we have here? Two more volunteers. Hunter 1: No way. Hunter 2: Yeah, I forgot her anniversary. Hunter 1: Aw, man. (The two hunters raise their hands out of fright when they see Android 17 is pointing his shotgun at them) Android 17: Hey, you beat me to it. (Android 17 raises his hand) Vegeta: No way. I won't let it happen. No pink mutant freak is going to defeat me! Hercule: (to the people of Earth) What's wrong with you ingrates? Can't you lend us a hand? Come on! How many times have I saved you people, huh? Piccolo: (about Mister Satan convincing the people of Earth to provide their energy for Goku's Spirit Bomb) Go champ. I don't believe it. That guy. I swear. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. King Cold: (about Goku) How preposterous. He would lose just to save Vegeta? Frieza: Heh heh heh. That Saiyan is such a sucker. Babidi: (to himself) Buu! I hope you die, you spoiled brat! Vegeta: Don't disgrace our efforts with your sentimental rubbish! Launch the bomb! Goku: No! You're the one who got us this far! Goku: (after seeing Hercule grab and save Vegeta) He's got Vegeta! Ah! Way to go, champ! You really are a hero! Hercule: (after Vegeta tells Hercule to take more energy from the Earthlings, although they might die as a result of losing too much energy) Oh, please forgive me. But I can't. I can't. It would destroy me. Vegeta: What do you mean? Hercule: I've been a shameless fake my whole life. But they believed me. They loved me. So if I turn my back on them now, what will it make me? Vegeta: Grr... Hercule: Not even I could sink that low. It would be worse than death to betray them like that. Goku: (to Kid Buu) Maybe you'll come back someday as...as a better person, I hope. I'd like that. Perhaps we'll have a little one on one. Hercule: (about Majin Buu) He fought that Evil Buu with all he had. Vegeta: Oh, right! And what if he's not all gone!? What if he blows his stack again and produces another killing machine!? What then!? Hercule: Well, I don't know. Vegeta: Well, I do! It would mean the end of the world! You might be willing to take that gamble! But I'm not! Goku: Lets see. I guess we could keep Buu indoors and away from everyone for the first six months. Then we could use the Dragon Balls to wish the Earthling's memory of Buu away. See, it's that simple. Elder Kai: Yeah, sure. Just wish it away. Great. Eh... Goku: Well, then. It's all settled, right? Vegeta: Yes, that's a brilliant idea... if you don't have a brain! Majin Buu: Buu needs money for ice cream, Buu want ice cream, but Buu needs money for ice cream, so Buu want money. Bulma: If Vegeta and Trunks think they could just fly off every time the shopping takes more than an hour, they've got another thing coming! Goku: (to Gotenks) If I were you guys, I'd stay fused together so Chi-Chi could only spank you once! Vegeta: (to the audience) What are you looking at? Goku: (to a pterodactyl) I have a family of my own I need to tend to. Two boys and a wife. An extremely angry wife who probably wants to kill me right now. Hercule: So, then guardians aren't forbidden to attend parties? Dende: If they are, it's a bit late now. Bulma: (Goku hasn't shown up to the party) It's just not the same without him, is it? Chi-Chi: Gosh. You really care for Goku. Hey, I know! How 'bout we trade mates! Vegeta for Goku! Bulma: Huh? Chi-Chi: Vegeta's not as sweet, but he's certainly more dependable. I think it evens out. Bulma: Hmm... (everyone laughs) Yamcha: Hey, I'm available, ladies! What do ya say, huh? Chi-Chi: We're talking an even trade. We don't want a downgrade. Goku: (to Gohan, after arriving late) Where's your mother? Chi-Chi: I'll tell you where I am! On lonely street! When you were dead, you had an excuse! But now it's just shameless neglect! Goten: So dad, what was the most weirdest part of the day? Goku: Well, I'll tell ya! I've eaten plenty of fish, but that's the first time one ate me! Bulma: What? Say it. Goku: Well, it's uh... just that you look middle aged. Bulma: Shut your rude mouth! I'll have you know that most people think I look good for my age! Excuse me for not being an alien monster that never changes! Vegeta: We Saiyans evolved as a warrior race. We retain our youthfulness so we can fight longer. Bulma: Hmph! I guess your race didn't evolve with enough brains to have good manners! Goku: You can't beat those stadium hot dogs! Vegeta: Hot dogs? Enough already. Tell me the real reason you're fighting. Goku: Okay. But I'd really rather talk about hot dogs! Vegeta: So your son has the same slack attitude as mine. Goku: Heh heh heh heh heh heh. Well, it's easy to get a little soft in times of peace. Vegeta: Pan has the right attitude. I'm going to enter as well. And guess what else? Trunks is entering. Aren't you, son? Trunks: Huh? Vegeta: If you don't, I'll cut your allowance in half! Trunks: (when entering the World Tournament stadium) Hey, Goten, who was it that won last time we fought here? Goten: That was last time. Wild Tiger: (to Pan) Oh, I see. Messin' with Wild Tiger? Well, that's not too smart. Dumb kid. Uub: Heaven help me. What am I gonna do? I... I promised everyone that I would win the prize and come back with lots of food. I can't go back empty-handed. Wild Tiger: What are you bozos belly-achin' about? I have to fight a little bitty kid! The mighty Wild Tiger doin' battle with a toddler? Come on... (Pan sticks her tongue at Wild Tiger) Ah, this is stupid. They shouldn't even let you in. This isn't a tournament for breast-feeding babies. Otokoski: Well, I'm happy with my match-up. (Otokoski puts his hand on Trunks' shoulder) Trunks: Eh!? Otokoski: Yo. I'll be gentle with you, don't worry. Knock: (to Vegeta) Hey, old man! Looks like we'll be fighting each other. Got a little attitude there. Is that it? Or are you just so old and ugly that you can't hear anymore? Uub: (to Goku) My mom isn't fat! Grr! My family isn't ugly! Grr! And my father's not a bedwetter! Hercule: I think I'm gonna go take a nap. Majin Buu: A nap? You no watch fight? Hercule: Ah... who cares? Goku's gonna win. Then, he'll go to the finals and face the great Majin Buu. And, after that, the reigning champ, that'd be me, is gonna step in and beat the winner in the title fight. Dende: (about Uub) Whoah, he's giving Goku a run for his money. Piccolo: Heh. Indeed he is, Dende. And Goku must be loving it. He's waited ten years for this. Uub: (to Goku) Your words are venom! Goku: Hey, Vegeta. Sorry to disappoint you. I was really looking forward to one more bout with the prince of all Saiyans. Vegeta: Heh. Don't worry about it. We couldn't play. Not here. When we fight, we'll need a whole planet for an arena. Goku: Ha ha. You're too much. Bye, my friend. Videl: You mean your dad's gone? Just like that? Gohan: Yeah, he has his way of coming and going. Chi-Chi: Uh... how could he...? Bulma: I'm sorry, but Goku's going to have to grow up someday and realize that there's more to life than fighting. Piccolo: He seemed happy to me. More so than in a long time. Dende: Yeah, you're right, Piccolo.